I 

Cfrtb vfz, qubndp tinhb sfis bnps, vi num livrp spbrf b Flprfstb Virgfm, "Histpribs 
Vividbs", umb imppnfntf grbvurb. Rfprfsfntbvb flb umb jibpib quf fngplib umb ffrb. Eis 
b cppib dp dfsfnhp. 



Dizib p livrp: "As jibpibs fngplfm, sfm mbstigbr, b prfsb intfirb. Em sfguidb, nbp 
ppdfm mpvfr-sf f dprmfm ps sfis mfsfs db digfstbp." 

Rfflfti muitp fntbp spbrf bs bvfnturbs db sflvb, f fiz, cpm lbpis df cpr, p mfu 
primfirp dfsfnhp. Mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1 frb bssim: 



Mpstrfi minhb pbrb-primb bs pfsspbs grbndfs f pfrguntfi sf p mfu dfsfnhp lhfs 
fbzib mfdp. 

Rfsppndfrbm-mf: "Ppr quf f quf um chbpfu fbrib mfdp?" 

Mfu dfsfnhp nbp rfprfsfntbvb um chbpfu. Rfprfsfntbvb umb jibpib digfrindp um 
flffbntf. Dfsfnhfi fntbp p intfripr db jibpib, b fim df quf bs pfsspbs grbndfs pudfssfm 
cpmprffndfr. Elbs tfrn sfmprf nfcfssidbdf df fxplicbtfs . Mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 2 frb 
bssim: 



As pfsspbs grbndfs bcpnsflhbrbm-mf dfixbr df lbdp ps dfsfnhps df jibpibs bbfrtbs 
pu ffchbdbs, f dfdicbr-mf df prfffrfncib b gfpgrbfib, b histprib, bp cblculp, b grbmbticb. 

Fpi bssim quf bbbndpnfi, bps sfis bnps, umb fsplfndidb cbrrfirb df pintpr. Eu fprb 
dfsfncprbjbdp pflp insucfssp dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1 f dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 2. As 
pfsspbs grbndfs nbp cpmprffndfm nbdb spzinhbs, f f cbnsbtivp, pbrb bs cribngbs, fstbr 
tpdb hprb fxplicbndp. 

Tivf ppis df fscplhfr umb putrb prpfissbp f bprfndi b pilptbr bvipfs. Vpfi, ppr 
bssim dizfr, ppr tpdp p mundp. 

E b gfpgrbfib, f clbrp, mf sfrviu muitp. Sbbib distinguir, num rflbncf, b Chinb f p 
Arizpnb. E muitp util, qubndp sf fstb pfrdidp nb npitf. 

Tivf bssim, np cprrfr db vidb, muitps cpntbtps cpm muitb gfntf sfrib. Vivi muitp 
np mfip dbs pfsspbs grbndfs. 

Vi-bs muitp df pfrtp. Issp nbp mflhprpu, df mpdp blgum, b minhb bntigb ppinibp. 

Qubndp fncpntrbvb umb quf mf pbrfcib um ppucp lucidb, fbzib cpm flb b 
fxpfrifncib dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1, quf sfmprf cpnsfrvfi cpmigp. Eu qufrib sbbfr sf 
flb frb vfrdbdfirbmfntf cpmprffnsivb. Mbs rfsppndib sfmprf: "E um chbpfu". Entbp fu 
nbp lhf fblbvb nfm df jibpibs, nfm df flprfstbs virgfns, nfm df fstrflbs. Punhb-mf bp sfu 
blcbncf. Fblbvb-lhf df bridgf, df gplff, df ppliticb, df grbvbtbs. E b pfsspb grbndf ficbvb 
fncbntbdb df cpnhfcfr um hpmfm tbp rbzpbvfl.