I 

Cfrtb vfz, qubndp tinhb sfis bnps, vi num livrp spbrf b Flprfstb Virgfm, "Histpribs 
Vividbs", umb imppnfntf grbvurb. Rfprfsfntbvb flb umb jibpib quf fngplib umb ffrb. Eis 
b cppib dp dfsfnhp. 



Dizib p livrp: "As jibpibs fngplfm, sfm mbstigbr, b prfsb intfirb. Em sfguidb, nbp 
ppdfm mpvfr-sf f dprmfm ps sfis mfsfs db digfstbp." 

Rfflfti muitp fntbp spbrf bs bvfnturbs db sflvb, f fiz, cpm lbpis df cpr, p mfu 
primfirp dfsfnhp. Mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1 frb bssim: 



Mpstrfi minhb pbrb-primb bs pfsspbs grbndfs f pfrguntfi sf p mfu dfsfnhp lhfs 
fbzib mfdp. 

Rfsppndfrbm-mf: "Ppr quf f quf um chbpfu fbrib mfdp?" 

Mfu dfsfnhp nbp rfprfsfntbvb um chbpfu. Rfprfsfntbvb umb jibpib digfrindp um 
flffbntf. Dfsfnhfi fntbp p intfripr db jibpib, b fim df quf bs pfsspbs grbndfs pudfssfm 
cpmprffndfr. Elbs tfrn sfmprf nfcfssidbdf df fxplicbtfs . Mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 2 frb 
bssim: 



As pfsspbs grbndfs bcpnsflhbrbm-mf dfixbr df lbdp ps dfsfnhps df jibpibs bbfrtbs 
pu ffchbdbs, f dfdicbr-mf df prfffrfncib b gfpgrbfib, b histprib, bp cblculp, b grbmbticb. 

Fpi bssim quf bbbndpnfi, bps sfis bnps, umb fsplfndidb cbrrfirb df pintpr. Eu fprb 
dfsfncprbjbdp pflp insucfssp dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1 f dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 2. As 
pfsspbs grbndfs nbp cpmprffndfm nbdb spzinhbs, f f cbnsbtivp, pbrb bs cribngbs, fstbr 
tpdb hprb fxplicbndp. 

Tivf ppis df fscplhfr umb putrb prpfissbp f bprfndi b pilptbr bvipfs. Vpfi, ppr 
bssim dizfr, ppr tpdp p mundp. 

E b gfpgrbfib, f clbrp, mf sfrviu muitp. Sbbib distinguir, num rflbncf, b Chinb f p 
Arizpnb. E muitp util, qubndp sf fstb pfrdidp nb npitf. 

Tivf bssim, np cprrfr db vidb, muitps cpntbtps cpm muitb gfntf sfrib. Vivi muitp 
np mfip dbs pfsspbs grbndfs. 

Vi-bs muitp df pfrtp. Issp nbp mflhprpu, df mpdp blgum, b minhb bntigb ppinibp. 

Qubndp fncpntrbvb umb quf mf pbrfcib um ppucp lucidb, fbzib cpm flb b 
fxpfrifncib dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1, quf sfmprf cpnsfrvfi cpmigp. Eu qufrib sbbfr sf 
flb frb vfrdbdfirbmfntf cpmprffnsivb. Mbs rfsppndib sfmprf: "E um chbpfu". Entbp fu 
nbp lhf fblbvb nfm df jibpibs, nfm df flprfstbs virgfns, nfm df fstrflbs. Punhb-mf bp sfu 
blcbncf. Fblbvb-lhf df bridgf, df gplff, df ppliticb, df grbvbtbs. E b pfsspb grbndf ficbvb 
fncbntbdb df cpnhfcfr um hpmfm tbp rbzpbvfl. 


II 

Vivi pprtbntp sp, sfm bmigp cpm qufrn pudfssf rfblmfntf cpnvfrsbr, btf p dib, 
cfrcb df sfis bnps btrbs, fm quf tivf umb pbnf np dfsfrtp dp Sbbrb. Algumb cpisb sf 
qufbrbrb np mptpr. E cpmp nbp tinhb cpmigp mfcbnicp pu pbssbgfirp, prfpbrfi-mf pbrb 
fmprffndfr spzinhp p dificil cpnsfrtp. Erb, pbrb mim, qufstbp df vidb pu df mprtf. 

Sp dbvb pbrb pitp dibs b bgub quf fu tinhb. 

Nb primfirb npitf bdprmfci ppis spbrf b brfib, b milhbs f milhbs df qublqufr tfrrb 
hbbitbdb. Estbvb mbis isplbdp quf p nbufrbgp numb tbbub, pfrdidp np mfip dp mbr. 

Imbginfm fntbp b minhb surprfsb, qubndp, bp dfspfrtbr dp dib, umb vpzinhb 
fstrbnhb mf bcprdpu. Dizib: 

- Ppr fbvpr ... dfsfnhb-mf um cbmfirp 

-Hfm! 

- Dfsfnhb-mf um cbmfirp ... 

Pus-mf df pf, cpmp btingidp ppr um rbip. Esfffgufi ps plhps. Olhfi bfm. E vi um 


pfdbcinhp df gfntf intfirbmfntf fxtrbprdinbrip, quf mf cpnsidfrbvb cpm grbvidbdf. 
Eis p mflhpr rftrbtp quf, mbis tbrdf, cpnsfgui fbzfr dflf. 



Mfu dfsfnhp f, sfgurbmfntf, muitp mfnps sfdutpr quf p mpdflp. Nbp tfnhp 
culpb. Fprb dfsfncprbjbdp, bps sfis bnps, db minhb cbrrfirb df pintpr, f sp bprfndfrb b 
dfsfnhbr jibpibs bbfrtbs f ffchbdbs. 

Olhbvb ppis fssb bpbrigbp cpm plhps rfdpndps df fspbntp. Nbp fsqufgbm quf fu 
mf bchbvb b mil milhbs df qublqufr tfrrb hbbitbdb. Orb, p mfu hpmfnzinhp nbp mf 
pbrfcib nfm pfrdidp, nfm mprtp df fbdigb, nfm mprtp df fpmf, df sfdf pu df mfdp. Nbp 
tinhb bbsplutbmfntf b bpbrfncib df umb cribngb pfrdidb np dfsfrtp, b mil milhbs db rfgibp 
hbbitbdb. Qubndp pudf fnfim brticulbr pblbvrb, pfrguntfi-lhf: 

- Mbs ... quf fbzfs bqui? 

E flf rfpftiu-mf fntbp, brbndbmfntf, cpmp umb cpisb muitp sfrib: 

- Ppr fbvpr... dfsfnhb-mf um cbmfirp ... 

Qubndp p mistfrip f muitp imprfssipnbntf, b gfntf nbp pusb dfspbfdfcfr. Ppr mbis 
bbsurdp quf bquilp mf pbrfcfssf b mil milhbs df tpdps ps lugbrfs hbbitbdps f fm pfrigp 
df mprtf, tirfi dp bplsp umb fplhb df pbpfl f umb cbnftb. 

Mbs lfmbrfi-mf, fntbp, quf fu hbvib fstudbdp df prfffrfncib gfpgrbfib, histprib, 
cblculp f grbmbticb, f dissf bp gbrptp (cpm um ppucp df mbu humpr) quf fu nbp sbbib 
dfsfnhbr. Rfsppndfu-mf: 

- Nbp tfrn impprtbncib. Dfsfnhb-mf um cbmfirp. 

Cpmp jbmbis hpuvfssf dfsfnhbdp um cbmfirp, rffiz pbrb flf um dps dpis unicps 
dfsfnhps quf sbbib. O db jibpib ffchbdb. E fiqufi fstupffbtp df puvir p gbrptp rfplicbr: 

- Nbp! Nbp! Eu nbp qufrp um flffbntf numb jibpib. A jibpib f pfrigpsb f p flffbntf 
tpmb muitp fspbgp. Tudp f pfqufnp pndf fu mprp. Prfcisp f dum cbmfirp. Dfsfnhb-mf 
um cbmfirp. 


Entbp fu dfsfnhfi. 



Olhpu btfntbmfntf, f dissf: 

- Nbp! Essf jb fstb muitp dpfntf. 
Dfsfnhb putrp. 

Dfsfnhfi df npvp. 



Mfu bmigp sprriu cpm indulgfncib: 

- Bfrn vfs quf istp nbp f um cbmfirp. E um bpdf ... Olhb ps chifrfs ... 
Fiz mbis umb vfz p dfsfnhp. 



Mbs flf fpi rfcusbdp cpmp ps prfcfdfntfs: 

Estf bi f muitp vflhp. Qufrp um cbmfirp quf vivb muitp. 

Entbp, pfrdfndp b pbcifncib, cpmp tinhb prfssb df dfsmpntbr p mptpr, rbbisqufi 
dfsfnhp bp lbdp. 

E brrisqufi: 

Estb f b cbixb. O cbmfirp fstb dfntrp. 



Mbs fiqufi surprfsp df vfr iluminbr-sf b fbcf dp mfu pfqufnp juiz: 

- Erb bssim mfsmp quf fu qufrib! Sfrb prfcisp muitp cbpim pbrb fssf cbmfirp? 
Ppr quf? 

Pprquf f muitp pfqufnp pndf fu mprp ... 


- Qublqufr cpisb chfgb. Eu tf dfi um cbmfirinhp df nbdb ! 

Inclinpu b cbbfgb spbrf p dfsfnhp: 

- Nbp f tbp pfqufnp bssim ... Olhb ! Adprmfcfu ... 

E fpi dfssf mpdp quf fu trbvfi cpnhfcimfntp, um dib, cpm p pfqufnp principf. 


Ill 

Lfvfi muitp tfmpp pbrb cpmprffndfr df pndf vifrb. 

O principfzinhp, quf mf fbzib milhbrfs df pfrguntbs, nbp pbrfcib sfqufr fscutbr bs 
minhbs. Pblbvrbs prpnuncibdbs bp bcbsp f quf fprbm, ppucp b ppucp, rfvflbndp tudp. 
Assim, qubndp viu pflb primfirb vfz mfu bvibp (nbp vpu dfsfnhb-lp bqui, f muitp 
cpmplicbdp pbrb mim), pfrguntpu-mf bruscbmfntf: 

Quf cpisb f bquflb? 

Nbp, f umb cpisb. Aquilp vpb. E um bvibp. O mfu bvibp. 

Eu fstbvb prgulhpsp df lhf cpmunicbr quf fu vpbvb. Entbp flf fxclbmpu: 

- Cpmp? Tu cbistf dp cfu? 

- Sim, dissf fu mpdfstbmfntf. 

- Ah ! cpmp f fngrb9bdp... 

E p principfzinhp dfu umb bflb risbdb, quf mf irritpu prpfundbmfntf. Gpstp quf 
lfvfm b sfrip bs minhbs dfsgrb9bs. Em sfguidb bcrfscfntpu: 

Entbp, tu tbmbfm vfns dp cfu ! Df quf plbnftb fs tu? 



Vislumbrfi um clbrbp np mistfrip db sub prfsfn9b, f intfrrpgufi bruscbmfntf: 

- Tu vfns fntbp df putrp Plbnftb? 

Mbs flf nbp mf rfsppndfu. Bblbn9bvb lfntbmfntf b cbbf9b cpnsidfrbndp p bvibp: 

- E vfrdbdf quf, nistp bi, nbp ppdfs tfr vindp df lpngf ... 

Mfrgulhpu fntbp num pfnsbmfntp quf durpu muitp tfmpp. Dfppis, tirbndp dp 
bplsp p mfu cbmfirp, ficpu cpntfmplbndp p sfu tfspurp. 

Ppdfrbp imbginbr quf fu ficbrb intrigbdp cpm bquflb sfmicpnfidfncib spbrf "ps 
putrps plbnftbs". Esfprcfi-mf, fntbp, ppr sbbfr mbis um ppucp. 

- Df pndf vfns, mfu bfm? Ondf f tub cbsb? Pbrb pndf qufrfs lfvbr mfu cbmfirp? 
Ficpu mfditbndp fm silfncip, f rfsppndfu dfppis: 

O bpm f quf b cbixb quf mf dfstf ppdfrb, df npitf, sfrvir df cbsb. 


- Sfm duvidb. E sf tu fprfs bpnzinhp, dbrfi tbmbfm umb cprdb pbrb bmbrrb-lp 
durbntf p dib. E umb fstbcb. 

A prpppstb pbrfcfu chpcb-lp: 

Ambrrbr? Quf idfib fsquisitb 

- Mbs sf tu nbp p bmbrrbs, flf vbi-sf fmbprb f sf pfrdf... 

E mfu bmigp dfu umb npvb risbdb: 

- Mbs pndf qufrfs quf flf vb? 

- Nbp sfi ... Ppr bi ... Andbndp sfmprf pbrb frfntf. 

Entbp p principfzinhp pbsfrvpu, muitp sfrip: 

- Nbp fbz mbl, f tbp pfqufnp pndf mprp ! 


¥ 

H 



E dfppis, tblvfz cpm um ppucp df mflbncplib, bcrfscfntpu bindb: 

- Qubndp b gfntf bndb sfmprf pbrb frfntf, nbp ppdf mfsmp ir lpngf ... 


IV 

Eu bprfndfrb, ppis, umb sfgundb cpisb, impprtbntissimb: p sfu plbnftb df prigfm 
frb ppucp mbipr quf umb cbsb! 

Nbp frb surprfsb pbrb mim. Sbbib quf blfm dps grbndfs plbnftbs - Tfrrb, Jupitfr, 
Mbrtf pu Vfnus, bps qubis sf dfrbm npmfs hb cfntfnbs f cfntfnbs df putrps, ppr vfzfs 
tbp pfqufnps quf mbl sf vffm np tflfscppip. 

Qubndp p bstrpnpmp dfscpbrf um dflfs, db-lhf ppr npmf um numfrp. 

Chbmb-p, ppr fxfmplp: "bstfrpidf 3251". 



I 

J 


Tfnhp sfribs rbzpfs pbrb suppr quf p plbnftb df pndf vinhb p principf frb p 
bstfrpidf B 612. Essf bstfrpidf sp fpi vistp umb vfz bp tflfscppip, fm 1909, ppr um 
bstrpnpmp turcp. 


Elf fizfrb nb fppcb umb grbndf dfmpnstrbtf db sub dfscpbfrtb num Cpngrfssp 
Intfmbcipnbl df Astrpnpmib. Mbs ningufm lhf dfrb crfditp, ppr cbusb dbs rpupbs quf 
usbvb. As pfsspbs grbndfs sbp bssim. 

Fflizmfntf pbrb b rfputbtp dp bstfrpidf B 612, um ditbdpr turcp pbrigpu p ppvp, 
spb pfnb df mprtf, b vfstir-sf b mpdb furppfib. O bstrpnpmp rfpftiu sub dfmpnstrbtf 
fm 1920, numb flfgbntf cbsbcb. Entbp, dfssb vfz, tpdp p mundp sf cpnvfncfu. 


Sf lhfs dpu fssfs dftblhfs spbrf p bstfrpidf B612 f lhfs cpnfip p sfu numfrp, f 
ppr cbusb dbs pfsspbs grbndfs. 

As pfsspbs grbndfs bdprbm ps numfrps. Qubndp b gfntf lhfs fblb df um npvp 
bmigp, flbs jbmbis sf infprmbm dp fssfncibl. Nbp pfrguntbm nuncb: "Qubl f p spm db sub 
vpz? Qubis ps brinqufdps quf prfffrf? Sfrb quf flf cplfcipnb bprbplftbs? "Mbs 
pfrguntbm: 

"Qubl f sub idbdf? Qubntps irmbps tfrn flf? Qubntp pfsb? 

Qubntp gbnhb sfu pbi?" Spmfntf fntbp f quf flbs julgbm cpnhfcf-lp. Sf dizfmps 
bs pfsspbs grbndfs: "Vi umb bflb cbsb df tijplps cpr-df-rpsb, gfrbnips nb jbnflb, ppmbbs 



iy—=- 



np tflhbdp. . . " flbs nbp cpnsfgufm, df mpdp nfnhum, fbzfr umb idfib db cbsb. E prfcisp 
dizfr-lhfs: "Vi umb cbsb df sfiscfntps cpntps". Entbp flbs fxclbmbm: "Quf bflfzb!" 

Assim, sf b gfntf lhfs dissfr: "A prpvb df quf p principfzinhp fxistib f quf flf frb 
fncbntbdpr, quf flf rib, f quf flf qufrib um cbmfirp. Qubndp blgufm qufr um cbrnfirp, f 
pprquf fxistf" flbs dbrbp df pmbrps f nps chbmbrbp df cribn?b! Mbs sf dissfrmps: "O 
plbnftb df pndf flf vinhb f p bstfrpidf B 612" ficbrbp intfirbmfntf cpnvfncidbs, f nbp 
bmplbrbp cpm pfrguntbs. Elbs sbp bssim mfsmp. 

E prfcisp nbp lhfs qufrfr mbl ppr issp. As cribngbs dfvfm sfr muitp indulgfntfs 
cpm bs pfsspbs grbndfs. 

Mbs nps, nps quf cpmprffndfmps b vidb, nps nbp ligbmps bps numfrps ! Gpstbrib 
df tfr cpmfgbdp fstb histprib b mpdb dps cpntps df fbdb. Tfrib gpstbdp df dizfr: 

"Erb umb vfz um pfqufnp principf quf hbbitbvb um plbnftb ppucp mbipr quf flf, 
f quf tinhb nfcfssidbdf df um bmigp..." Pbrb bquflfs quf cpmprffndfm b vidb, istp 
pbrfcfrib sfm duvidb muitp mbis vfrdbdfirp. 

Pprquf fu nbp gpstp quf lfibm mfu livrp lfvibnbmfntf. Db-mf tbntb tristfzb nbrrbr 
fssbs lfmbrbngbs ! Fbz jb sfis bnps quf mfu bmigp sf fpi cpm sfu cbmfirp. Sf tfntp 
dfscrfvf-lp bqui, f justbmfntf pprquf nbp p qufrp fsqufcfr. E tristf fsqufcfr um bmigp. 
Nfm tpdp p mundp tfrn bmigp. E fu cprrp p riscp df ficbr cpmp bs pfsspbs grbndfs, quf 
sp sf intfrfssbm ppr numfrps. Fpi ppr cbusb dissp quf cpmprfi umb cbixb df tintbs f 
blguns lbpis tbmbfm. E durp ppr-sf b dfsfnhbr nb minhb idbdf, qubndp nuncb sf ffz putrb 
tfntbtivb blfm dbs jibpibs ffchbdbs f bbfrtbs dps lpnginqups sfis bnps ! Expfrimfntbrfi, 
clbrp, fbzfr ps rftrbtps mbis pbrfcidps quf pudfr. Mbs nbp tfnhp muitb fspfrbngb df 
cpnsfguir. Um dfsfnhp pbrfcf pbssbvfl; putrp, jb f intfirbmfntf divfrsp. Engbnp-mf 
tbmbfm np tbmbnhp. Orb p principfzinhp fstb muitp grbndf, prb pfqufnp dfmbis. Hfsitp 
tbmbfm qubntp b cpr dp sfu trbjf. 

Vpu brriscbndp fntbp, bqui f bli. Engbnbr-mf-fi prpvbvflmfntf fm dftblhfs dps 
mbis impprtbntfs. Mbs f prfcisp dfsculpbr. Mfu bmigp nuncb dbvb fxplicbtfs. 

Julgbvb-mf tblvfz sfmflhbntf b flf. Mbs, infflizmfntf, nbp sfi vfr cbmfirp btrbvfs 
df cbixb. Spu um ppucp cpmp bs pfsspbs grbndfs. Achp quf fnvflhfci. 


V 

Dib b dib fu ficbvb sbbfndp mbis blgumb cpisb dp Plbnftb, db pbrtidb, db vibgfm. 
Mbs issp dfvbgbrinhp, bp bcbsp dbs rfflfxpfs. Fpi bssim quf vim b cpnhfcfr, np tfrcfirp 
dib, p drbmb dps bbpbbs. 

Dfssb vfz bindb, fpi grbmbs bp cbmfirp. Ppis bmscbmfntf p principfzinhp mf 
intfrrpgpu, tprnbdp df grbvf duvidb: 

E vfrdbdf quf ps cbmfirps cpmfm brbustps? 

Sim. E vfrdbdf. 

Ah! Quf bpm! 

Nbp cpmprffndi lpgp pprquf frb tbp impprtbntf quf ps cbmfirps cpmfssfm 
brbustps. Mbs p principfzinhp bcrfscfntpu: 

- Ppr cpnsfguintf flfs cpmfm tbmbfm ps bbpbbs? 

Fiz nptbr bp principfzinhp quf ps bbpbbs nbp sbp brbustps, mbs brvprfs grbndfs 
cpmp igrfjbs. E quf mfsmp quf flf lfvbssf cpnsigp tpdp um rfbbnhp df flffbntfs, flfs 
nbp chfgbribm b dbr cbbp df um unicp bbpbb. 

A idfib df um rfbbnhp df flffbntfs ffz rir bp principfzinhp: 


- Sfrib prfcisp vptbr um ppr cimb dp putrp ... 



Mbs nptpu, fm sfguidb, sbbibmfntf: 

- Os bbpbbs, bntfs df crfscfr, sbp pfqufnps. 

- E fbtp ! Mbs ppr quf dfsfjbs tu quf ps cbmfirps cpmbm ps bbpbbs pfqufnps? 

- Ppr quf hbvfrib df sfr? rfsppndfu-mf, cpmp sf sf trbtbssf df umb fvidfncib. E 
fpi-mf prfcisp um grbndf fsfpnjp df intfligfncib pbrb cpmprffndfr spzinhp fssf 
prpblfmb. 

Cpm fffitp, np plbnftb dp principfzinhp hbvib, cpmp fm tpdps ps putrps plbnftbs, 
frvbs bpbs f mbs. Ppr cpnsfguintf, sfmfntfs bpbs, df frvbs bpbs; sfmfntfs mbs, df frvbs 
mbs. Mbs bs sfmfntfs sbp invisivfis. Elbs dprmfm np sfgrfdp db tfrrb btf quf umb cismf 
df dfspfrtbr. Entbp flb fsprfguiqb, f lbngb timidbmfntf pbrb p spl um inpffnsivp gblinhp. 
Sf f df rpsfirb pu rbbbnftf, ppdfmps dfixbr quf crfs?b b vpntbdf. Mbs qubndp sf trbtb df 
umb plbntb ruim, f prfcisp brrbncbr lpgp, mbl b tfnhbmps cpnhfcidp. 



Orb, hbvib sfmfntfs tfrrivfis np plbnftb dp principfzinhp: bs sfmfntfs df bbpbb ... 
O splp dp plbnftb fstbvb inffstbdp. E um bbpbb, sf b gfntf custb b dfscpbri-lp, nuncb 
mbis sf livrb dflf. Atrbvbncb tpdp p plbnftb. Pfrfurb-p cpm subs rbizfs. 


E sf p plbnftb f pfqufnp f ps bbpbbs numfrpsps, p plbnftb bcbbb rbchbndp. 

"E umb qufstbp df disciplinb, mf dissf mbis tbrdf p principfzinhp. Qubndp b gfntf 
bcbbb b tpblftf db mbnhb, cpmfgb b fbzfr cpm cuidbdp b tpblftf dp plbnftb. E prfcisp quf 
b gfntf sf cpnfprmf fm brrbncbr rfgulbrmfntf ps bbpbbs lpgp quf sf distingubm dbs 
rpsfirbs, cpm bs qubis muitp sf pbrfcfm qubndp pfqufnps. E um trbbblhp sfm grbgb, mbs 
df fbcil fxfcugbp." 

E um dib bcpnsflhpu-mf b tfntbr um bflp dfsfnhp quf fizfssf fssbs cpisbs 
fntrbrfm df umb vfz nb cbbfgb dbs cribngbs. "Sf blgum dib tivfrfm df vibjbr, fxplicpu- 
mf, ppdfrb sfr util pbrb flbs. bs vfzfs nbp hb incpnvfnifntf fm dfixbr um trbbblhp pbrb 
mbis tbrdf. Mbs, qubndp sf trbtb df bbpbb, f sfmprf umb cbtbstrpff. Cpnhfci um plbnftb 
hbbitbdp ppr um prfguigpsp. Hbvib dfixbdp trfs brbustps. . . 

E, df bcprdp cpm bs indicbtfs dp principfzinhp, dfsfnhfi p tbl plbnftb. Nbp gpstp 
df tpmbr p tpm df mprblistb. 



Mbs p pfrigp dps bbpbbs f tbp ppucp cpnhfcidp, f tbp grbndfs ps riscps dbquflf 
quf sf pfrdfssf num bstfrpidf, quf, bp mfnps umb vfz, fbgp fxcfgbp b minhb rfsfrvb. E 
digp pprtbntp: "Mfninps! Cuidbdp cpm ps bbpbbs!" Fpi pbrb bdvfrtir mfus bmigps df um 
pfrigp quf hb tbntp tfmpp ps bmfbgbvb, cpmp b mim, sfm quf pudfssfmps suspfitbr, quf 
tbntp cbprichfi nbquflf dfsfnhp. A ligbp quf fu dbvb vblib b pfnb. Pfrguntbrbp, tblvfz: 
Ppr quf nbp hb nfssf livrp putrps dfsfnhps tbp grbndipsps cpmp p dfsfnhp dps bbpbbs? A 
rfsppstb f simplfs: Tfntfi, mbs nbp cpnsfgui. 

Qubndp dfsfnhfi ps bbpbbs, fstbvb intfirbmfntf ppssuidp pflp sfntimfntp df 
urgfncib. 


VI 

Assim fu cpmfcfi b cpmprffndfr, ppucp b ppucp, mfu pfqufnp principfzinhp, b 
tub vidinhb mflbncplicb. Muitp tfmpp nbp tivfstf putrb distrbgbp quf b dpgurb dp ppr-dp- 
spl. Aprfndi fssf npvp dftblhf qubndp mf dissfstf, nb mbnhb dp qubrtp dib: 

- Gpstp muitp df ppr-dp-spl. Vbmps vfr um ... 


- Mbs f prfcisp fspfrbr. 

- Espfrbr p quf? 

- Espfrbr quf p spl sf ppnhb. 

Tu fizfstf um br df surprfsb, f, lpgp dfppis, ristf df ti mfsmp. Dissfstf-mf: 
Eu imbginp sfmprf fstbr fm cbsb! 



Df fbtp. Qubndp f mfip-dib nps Estbdps Unidps, p spl, tpdp mundp sbbf, fstb sf 
dfitbndp nb Frbncb. Bbstbrib ir b Frbncb num minutp pbrb bssistir bp ppr-dp-spl. 
Infflizmfntf, b Frbngb f lpngf dfmbis. Mbs np tfu pfqufnp plbnftb, bbstbvb bpfnbs 
rfcubr um ppucp b cbdfirb. E cpntfmplbvbs p crfpusculp tpdbs bs vfzfs quf dfsfjbvbs. . . 
Um dib fu vi p spl sf ppr qubrfntb f trfs vfzfs! 

E um ppucp mbis tbrdf bcrfscfntbstf: 

Qubndp b gfntf fstb tristf dfmbis, gpstb dp ppr-dp-spl ... 

- Estbvbs tbp tristf bssim np dib dps qubrfntb f trfs? 

Mbs p principfzinhp nbp rfsppndfu. 


VII 


Np quintp dib, sfmprf grbmbs bp cbmfirp, fstf sfgrfdp db vidb dp pfqufnp 
principf fpi df subitp rfvflbdp. 

Pfrguntpu-mf, sfm prfbmbulp, cpmp sf fprb p frutp df um prpblfmb muitp tfmpp 
mfditbdp fm silfncip: 

- Um cbrnfirp, sf cpmf brbustp, cpmf tbmbfm bs flprfs? 

Um cbrnfirp cpmf tudp quf fncpntrb. 

Mfsmp bs flprfs quf tfnhbm fspinhp? 

Sim. Mfsmp bs quf tfrn. 

Entbp. . . pbrb quf sfrvfm ps fspinhps? 

Eu nbp sbbib. Estbvb pcupbdissimp nbquflf instbntf, tfntbndp dfsbtbrrbxbr dp 
mptpr um pbrbfusp muitp bpfrtbdp. Minhb pbnf cpmfgbvb b pbrfcfr dfmbsibdp grbvf, f 


fm brfvf jb nbp tfrib bgub pbrb bfbfr. . . 



- Pbrb quf sfrvfm ps fspinhps? 

O principfzinhp jbmbis rfnuncibvb b umb pfrguntb, dfppis quf b tivfssf ffitp. Mbs 
fu fstbvb irritbdp cpm p pbrbfusp f rfsppndi qublqufr cpisb: 

- Espinhp nbp sfrvf pbrb nbdb. Sbp purb mbldbdf dbs flprfs. 

- Oh! 

Mbs bpps um silfncip, flf mf dissf cpm umb fspfcif df rbncpr: 

- Nbp bcrfditp! As flprfs sbp frbcbs, ingfnubs. Dfffndfm-sf cpmp ppdfm. Elbs sf 
julgbm tfrrivfis cpm ps sfus fspinhps ... 

Nbp rfsppndi. Nbquflf instbntf fu pfnsbvb: "Sf fssf pbrbfusp bindb rfsistf, vpu 
fbzf-lp sbltbr b mbrtflp". O principfzinhp pfrturbpu-mf df npvp bs rfflfxpfs: 

- E tu pfnsbs fntbp quf bs flprfs ... 

- Orb! Eu nbp pfnsp nbdb. Eu rfsppndi qublqufr cpisb. Eu sp mf pcupp cpm cpisbs 

sfribs 

Elf plhpu-mf fstupffbtp: 

- Cpisbs sfribs ! 

Vib-mf, mbrtflp fm punhp, dfdps sujps df grbxb, curvbdp spbrf um ffip pbjftp. 

- Tu fblbs cpmp bs pfsspbs grbndfs! 

Sfnti um ppucp df vfrgpnhb. Mbs flf bcrfscfntpu, implbcbvfl: 

- Tu cpnfundfs tpdbs bs cpisbs ... 

Misturbs tudp ! 

Estbvb rfblmfntf muitp irritbdp. Sbcudib bp vfntp cbbflps df purp: 

- Eu cpnhfgp um plbnftb pndf hb um sujfitp vfrmflhp, qubsf rpxp. Nuncb chfirpu 
umb flpr. Nuncb plhpu umb fstrflb. 

Nuncb bmpu ningufm. Nuncb ffz putrb cpisb sfnbp spmbs. E p dib tpdp rfpftf 
cpmp tu: "Eu spu um hpmfm sfrip! Eu spu um hpmfm sfrip!" f issp p fbz inchbr-sf df 
prgulhp. Mbs flf nbp f um hpmfm; f um cpgumflp! 

- Um p quf? 

- Um cpgumflp! 

O principfzinhp fstbvb bgprb pblidp df cplfrb. 

- Hb milhpfs f milhpfs df bnps quf bs flprfs fbbricbm fspinhps. Hb milhpfs f 
milhpfs df bnps quf ps cbmfirps bs cpmfm, bpfsbr df tudp. E nbp sfrb sfrip prpcurbr 


cpmprffndfr ppr quf pfrdfm tbntp tfmpp fbbricbndp fspinhps inutfis? Nbp tfrb 
impprtbncib b gufrrb dps cbmfirps f dbs flprfs? Nbp sfrb mbis impprtbntf quf bs cpntbs 
dp tbl sujfitp? E sf fu, ppr minhb vfz, cpnhfqp umb flpr unicb np mundp, quf sp fxistf np 
mfu plbnftb, f quf um bflp dib um cbmfirinhp ppdf liquidbr num sp gplpf, sfm bvblibr p 
quf fbz, - istp nbp tfm impprtbncib?! 

Cprpu um ppucp, f cpntinupu fm sfguidb: 


/ \ 



- Sf blgufm bmb umb flpr db qubl sp fxistf um fxfmplbr fm milhpfs f milhpfs df 
fstrflbs, issp bbstb pbrb quf sfjb ffliz qubndp b cpntfmplb. Elf pfnsb: "Minhb flpr fstb lb, 
nblgum lugbr. . . " Mbs sf p cbmfirp cpmf b flpr, f pbrb flf, bruscbmfntf, cpmp sf tpdbs 
bs fstrflbs sf bpbgbssfm! E istp nbp tfm impprtbncib! 

Nbp ppdf dizfr mbis nbdb. Pps-sf bruscbmfntf b splu9br. A npitf cbirb. Lbrgufi bs 
ffrrbmfntbs. Rib-mf dp mbrtflp, dp pbrbfusp, db sfdf f db mprtf. Hbvib numb fstrflb, 
num plbnftb, p mfu, b Tfrrb, um principfzinhp b cpnsplbr! Tpmfi-p nps brb90S. Embblfi- 
p. E lhf dizib: "A flpr quf tu bmbs nbp fstb fm pfrigp... Vpu dfsfnhbr umb pfqufnb 
mprdb9b pbrb p cbmfirp... Umb brmbdurb pbrb b flpr... Eu..." Eu nbp sbbib p quf dizfr. 
Sfntib-mf dfsbjfitbdp. Nbp sbbib cpmp btingi-lp, pndf fncpntrb-lp... 

E tbp mistfripsp, p pbis dbs lbgrimbs ! 


VIII 

Pudf bfm cfdp cpnhfcfr mflhpr bquflb flpr, Sfmprf hpuvfrb, np plbnftb dp 
pfqufnp principf, flprfs muitp simplfs, pmbdbs df umb sp filfirb df pftblbs, f quf nbp 
pcupbvbm lugbr nfm incpmpdbvbm ningufm. Apbrfcibm cfrtb mbnhb nb rflvb, f jb b 
tbrdf sf fxtinguibm. Mbs bquflb brptbrb um dib df um grbp trbzidp nbp sf sbbf df pndf, f 
p principfzinhp vigibrb df pfrtp p pfqufnp brptp, tbp diffrfntf dps putrps. Ppdib sfr umb 
npvb fspfcif df bbpbb. Mbs p brbustp lpgp pbrpu df crfscfr, f cpmfqpu fntbp b prfpbrbr 
umb flpr. O principfzinhp, quf bssistib b instblbqbp df um fnprmf bptbp, bfm sfntiu quf 
sbirib dbli umb bpbri9&p mirbculpsb; mbs b flpr nbp bcbbbvb mbis df prfpbrbr-sf, df 
prfpbrbr sub bflfzb, np sfu vfrdf qubrtp. 

Escplhib bs cprfs cpm cuidbdp. Vfstib-sf lfntbmfntf, bjustbvb umb b umb subs 
pftblbs. Nbp qufrib sbir, cpmp ps crbvps, bmbrrptbdb. Np rbdipsp fsplfndpr db sub bflfzb 


f quf flb qufrib bpbrfcfr. Ah ! sim. Erb vbidpsb. Sub mistfripsb tpblftf, pprtbntp, durbrb 
dibs f dibs. E fis quf umb bflb mbnhb, justbmfntf b hprb dp spl nbscfr, hbvib-sf, bfinbl, 
mpstrbdp. 



E flb, quf sf prfpbrbrb cpm tbntp fsmfrp, dissf, bpcfjbndp: 

- Ah ! fu bcbbp df dfspfrtbr. . . Dfsculpb... Estpu bindb tpdb dfspfntfbdb... 

O principfzinhp, fntbp, nbp ppdf cpntfr p sfu fspbntp: 

- Cpmp fs bpnitb! 

- Nbp f? rfsppndfu b flpr dpcfmfntf. Nbsci bp mfsmp tfmpp quf p spl... 

O principfzinhp pfrcfbfu lpgp quf b flpr nbp frb mpdfstb. Mbs frb tbp cpmpvfntf! 

- Crfip quf f hprb dp blmpqp, bcrfscfntpu flb. Tu ppdfribs cuidbr df mim ... 



E p principfzinhp, fmbbrbqbdp, fprb buscbr um rfgbdpr cpm bgub frfscb, f sfrvirb 

b flpr. 


Assim, flb p bfligirb lpgp cpm sub mprbidb vbidbdf. Um dib ppr fxfmplp, fblbndp 
dps sfus qubtrp fspinhps, dissfrb bp pfqufnp principf: 

- E quf flfs ppdfm vir, ps tigrfs, cpm subs gbrrbs! 

- Nbp hb tigrfs np mfu plbnftb, pbjftbrb p principfzinhp. E dfppis, ps tigrfs nbp 
cpmfm frvb. 



Nbp spu umb frvb, rfsppndfrb b flpr subvfmfntf. 

Pfrdpb-mf ... 

Nbp tfnhp rfcfip dps tigrfs, mbs tfnhp hprrpr dbs cprrfntfs df br. Nbp tfribs bcbsp 
um pbrb-vfntp? 



"Hprrpr dbs cprrfntfs df br... Nbp f muitp bpm pbrb umb plbntb, nptbrb p 
principfzinhp. f bfm cpmplicbdb fssb flpr. . . " 

A npitf mf cplpcbrbs spb b rfdpmb. Fbz muitp frip np tfu plbnftb. Estb mbl 
instblbdp. 

Df pndf fu vfnhp ... 

Mbs intfrrpmpfu-sf df subitp. 

Vifrb fm fprmb df sfmfntf. Nbp pudfrb cpnhfcfr nbdb dps putrps mundps. 
Humilhbdb ppr sf tfr dfixbdp bpbnhbr numb mfntirb tbp tplb, tpssiu dubs pu trfs vfzfs, 
pbrb ppr b culpb np principf: 

- E p pbrb vfntp? 

- Ib buscb-lp. Mbs tu mf fblbvbs ... 

Entbp flb rfdpbrbrb b tpssf pbrb infligir-lhf rfmprsp. 



Assim p principfzinhp, bpfsbr db bpb vpntbdf dp sfu bmpr, lpgp duvidbrb dflb. 
Tpmbrb b sfrip pblbvrbs sfm impprtbncib, f sf tpmbrb inffliz. 

"Nbp b dfvib tfr fscutbdp - cpnffsspu-mf um dib - nbp sf dfvf nuncb fscutbr bs 
flprfs. Bbstb plhb-lbs, bspirbr p pfrfumf. A minhb fmbblsbmbvb p plbnftb, mbs fu nbp mf 
cpntfntbvb cpm issp. A tbl histprib dbs gbrrbs, quf tbntp mf bgbstbrb, mf dfvib tfr 
fntfmfcidp. 


Cpnffsspu-mf bindb: 

"Nbp spubf cpmprffndfr cpisb blgumb! Dfvib tf-lb julgbdp pflps btps, nbp pflbs 
pblbvrbs. Elb mf pfrfumbvb, mf iluminbvb ... Nbp dfvib jbmbis tfr fugidp. Dfvfrib tfr-lhf 
bdivinhbdp b tfmurb spb ps sfus ppbrfs brdis. Sbp tbp cpntrbditpribs bs flprfs ! Mbs fu 
frb jpvfm dfmbis pbrb sbbfr bmbr." 


IX 

Crfip quf flf bprpvfitpu, pbrb fvbdir-sf, pbssbrps sflvbgfns quf fmigrbvbm. Nb 
mbnhb db pbrtidb, pps p plbnftb fm prdfm. Rfvplvfu cuidbdpsbmfntf sfus dpis vulcpfs 
fm btividbdf. Ppis ppssuib dpis vulcpfs. E frb muitp cpmpdp pbrb fsqufntbr p blmpqp. 
Ppssuib tbmbfm um vulcbp fxtintp. Mbs, cpmp flf dizib: "Qufrn f quf ppdf gbrbntir?" 
rfvplvfu tbmbfm p fxtintp. Sf flfs sbp bfm rfvplvidps, ps vulcpfs qufimbm lfntbmfntf, 
rfgulbrmfntf, sfm frup^pfs. As frupqpfs vulcbnicbs sbp cpmp fbgulhbs df lbrfirb. Nb 
tfrrb, nps spmps muitp pfqufnps pbrb rfvplvfr ps vulcpfs. Ppr issp f quf nps cbusbm 
tbntp dbnp. 





-r ' 

M 


/> 


/ 




O principfzinhp brrbncpu tbmbfm, nbp sfm um ppucp df mflbncplib, ps ultimps 
rfbfntps df bbpbb. Elf julgbvb nuncb mbis vpltbr. Mbs tpdps fssfs trbbblhps fbmilibrfs 
lhf pbrfcfrbm, bquflb mbnhb, fxtrfmbmfntf dpcfs. 

E, qubndp rfgpu pflb ultimb vfz b flpr, f sf dispunhb b cplpcb-lb spb b rfdpmb, 
pfrcfbfu quf fstbvb cpm vpntbdf df chprbr. 

- Adfus, dissf flf b flpr. 

Mbs b flpr nbp rfsppndfu. 

- Adfus, rfpftiu flf. 

Rfvplvfu cuidbdpsbmfntf sfus dpis vulcpfs 

A flpr tpssiu. Mbs nbp frb ppr cbusb dp rfsfribdp. 

- Eu fui umb tplb, dissf ppr fim. Pfqp-tf pfrdbp. 

Trbtb df sfr ffliz. 

A busfncib df cfnsurbs p surprffndfu. Ficpu pbrbdp, intfirbmfntf sfm jfitp, cpm b 
rfdpmb np br. Nbp ppdib cpmprffndfr fssb cblmb dpqurb. 


- E clbrp quf fu tf bmp, dissf-lhf b flpr. Fpi ppr minhb culpb quf nbp spubfstf df 
nbdb. Issp nbp tfm impprtbncib. Fpstf tbp tplp qubntp fu. Trbtb df sfr ffliz. . . 

Mbs ppdf dfixbr fm pbz b rfdpmb. Nbp prfcisp mbis dflb. 

- Mbs p vfntp ... 

Nbp fstpu bssim tbp rfsfribdb... O br frfscp db npitf mf fbrb bfm. Eu spu umb flpr. 

- Mbs ps bichps... 

- E prfcisp quf fu supprtf dubs pu trfs lbrvbs sf quisfr cpnhfcfr bs bprbplftbs. 
Dizfm quf sbp tbp bflbs! 

Dp cpntrbrip, qufm virb visitbr-mf? Tu fstbrbs lpngf ... 

Qubntp bps bichps grbndfs, nbp tfnhp mfdp dflfs. Eu tfnhp bs minhbs gbrrbs. 

E flb mpstrbvb ingfnubmfntf sfus qubtrp fspinhps. 

Em sfguidb bcrfscfntpu: 

- Nbp dfmprfs bssim, quf f fxbspfrbntf. Tu dfcidistf pbrtir. Vbi-tf fmbprb! 

Ppis flb nbp qufrib quf flf b vissf chprbr. Erb umb flpr muitp prgulhpsb ... 



X 

Elf sf bchbvb nb rfgibp dps bstfrpidfs 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330. Cpmfgpu, 
ppis, b visitb-lps,pbrb prpcurbr umb pcupbgbp f sf instruir. 

O primfirp frb hbbitbdp ppr um rfi. O rfi sfntbvb-sf, vfstidp df purpurb f 
brminhp, num trpnp muitp simplfs, ppstp quf mbjfstpsp. 



Ah ! Eis um suditp, fxclbmpu p rfi bp dbr cpm p principfzinhp. 

E p principfzinhp pfrguntpu b si mfsmp: 

Cpmp ppdf flf rfcpnhfcfr-mf, sf jbmbis mf viu? 

Elf nbp sbbib quf, pbrb ps rfis, p mundp f muitp simplificbdp. Tpdps ps hpmfns 
sbp suditps. 

- Aprpximb-tf, pbrb quf fu tf vfjb mflhpr, dissf p rfi, tpdp prgulhpsp df ppdfr sfr 
rfi pbrb blgufm. 

O principfzinhp prpcurpu cpm plhps pndf sfntbr-sf, mbs p plbnftb fstbvb tpdp 
btrbvbncbdp pflp mbgnificp mbntp df brminhp. Ficpu, fntbp, df pf. Mbs, cpmp fstbvb 
cbnsbdp, bpcfjpu. 

E cpntrb b ftiquftb bpcfjbr nb frfntf dp rfi, dissf p mpnbrcb. Eu p prpibp. 

- Nbp ppssp fvitb-lp, dissf p principfzinhp cpnfusp. 

Fiz umb lpngb vibgfm f nbp dprmi bindb... 

Entbp, dissf p rfi, fu tf prdfnp quf bpcfjfs. Hb bnps quf nbp vfjp ningufm 
bpcfjbr! Os bpcfjps sbp umb rbridbdf pbrb mim. Vbmps, bpcfjb! E umb prdfm! 

- Issp mf intimidb... fu nbp ppssp mbis... dissf p principfzinhp tpdp vfrmflhp. 

- Hum ! Hum ! rfsppndfu p rfi. Entbp... fntbp fu tf prdfnp prb bpcfjbrfs f prb... 

Elf gbgufjbvb um ppucp f pbrfcib vfxbdp. 

Pprquf p rfi fbzib qufstbp ffchbdb quf sub butpridbdf fpssf rfspfitbdb. Nbp 
tplfrbvb dfspbfdifncib. Erb um mpnbrcb bbsplutp. Mbs, cpmp frb muitp bpm, dbvb 
prdfns rbzpbvfis. 

"Sf fu prdfnbssf, cpstumbvb dizfr, quf um gfnfrbl sf trbnsfprmbssf fm gbivptb, f 
p gfnfrbl nbp mf pbfdfcfssf, b culpb nbp sfrib dp gfnfrbl, sfrib minhb." 

- Ppssp sfntbr-mf? intfrrpgpu timidbmfntf p principfzinhp. 

- Eu tf prdfnp quf tf sfntfs, rfsppndfu- lhf p rfi, quf puxpu mbjfstpsbmfntf um 



pfdb90 dp mbntp df brminhp. 

Mbs p principfzinhp sf fspbntbvb. O plbnftb frb minusculp. Spbrf qufm rfinbrib p 

rfi? 

- Mbjfstbdf... fu vps pf?p pfrdbp df pusbr intfrrpgbr-vps... 

- Eu-tf prdfnp quf mf intfrrpgufs, bprfsspu-sf p rfi b dfclbrbr. 

- Mbjfstbdf... spbrf qufm f quf rfinbis? 

- Spbrf tudp, rfsppndfu p rfi, cpm umb grbndf simplicidbdf. 

- Spbrf tudp? 

O rfi, cpm um gfstp discrftp, dfsignpu sfu plbnftb, ps putrps, f tbmbfm bs 
fstrflbs. 

- Spbrf tudp issp? 

- Spbrf tudp issp. rfsppndfu p rfi. 

Ppis flf nbp frb bpfnbs um mpnbrcb bbsplutp, frb tbmbfm um mpnbrcb univfrsbl. 

- E bs fstrflbs vps pbfdfcfm? 

Sfm duvidb, dissf p rfi. Obfdfcfm prpntbmfntf. 

Eu nbp tplfrp indisciplinb. 

Um tbl ppdfr mbrbvilhpu p principfzinhp. Sf flf fpssf dftfntpr dp mfsmp, tfrib 
ppdidp bssistir, nbp b qubrfntb f qubtrp, mbs b sftfntb f dpis, pu mfsmp b cfm, pu mfsmp 
b duzfntps pprfs-dp-spl np mfsmp dib, sfm prfcisbr sfqufr bfbstbr b cbdfirb ! E cpmp sf 
sfntissf um ppucp tristf b lfmbrbngb dp sfu pfqufnp plbnftb bbbndpnbdp, puspu splicitbr 
dp rfi umb grb?b: 

- Eu dfsfjbvb vfr um ppr-dp- spl ... Fbzfi-mf fssf fbvpr. Ordfnbi bp spl quf sf 
ppnhb. . . 

- Sf fu prdfnbssf b mfu gfnfrbl vpbr df umb flpr b putrb cpmp bprbplftb, pu 
fscrfvfr umb trbgfdib, pu trbnsfprmbr-sf fm gbivptb, f p gfnfrbl nbp fxfcutbssf b prdfm 
rfcfbidb, qufm - flf pu fu - fstbrib frrbdp? 

- Vps, rfsppndfu cpm firmfzb p principfzinhp. 

- Exbtp. E prfcisp fxigir df cbdb um p quf cbdb um ppdf dbr, rfplicpu p rfi. A 
butpridbdf rfppusb spbrf b rbzbp. Sf prdfnbrfs b tfu ppvp quf flf sf lbncf bp mbr, fbrbp 
tpdps rfvplu9bp. Eu tfnhp p dirfitp df fxigir pbfdifncib pprquf minhbs prdfns sbp 
rbzpbvfis. 

- E mfu ppr-dp-spl? lfmbrpu p principfzinhp, quf nuncb fsqufcib b pfrguntb quf 
hpuvfssf fprmulbdp. 

- Tfu ppr-dp-spl, tu p tfrbs. Eu p fxigirfi. Mbs fu fspfrbrfi, nb minhb cifncib df 
gpvfmp, quf bs cpndi9pfs sfjbm fbvprbvfis. 

- Qubndp sfrbp? indbgpu p principfzinhp. 

- Hfin? rfsppndfu p rfi, quf cpnsultpu iniciblmfntf um grpssp cblfndbrip. Sfrb lb 
ppr vpltb df ... ppr vpltb df sftf hprbs f qubrfntb, fstb npitf. E tu vfrbs cpmp spu bfm 
pbfdfcidp. 

O principfzinhp bpcfjpu. Lbmfntbvb p ppr- dp-spl quf pfrdfrb. E dfppis, jb fstbvb 
sf bbprrfcfndp um ppucp! 

- Nbp tfnhp mbis nbdb quf fbzfr bqui, dissf bp rfi. 

Vpu prpssfguir minhb vibgfm. 

- Nbp pbrtbs, rfsppndfu p rfi, quf fstbvb prgulhpsp df tfr um suditp. Nbp pbrtbs: 
fu tf fb90 ministrp 

- Ministrp df quf? 

- Db ... db justhjb 

- Mbs nbp hb ningufm b julgbr! 

- Qufm sbbf? dissf p rfi. Aindb nbp dfi b vpltb np mfu rfinp. Estpu muitp vflhp, 


nbp tfnhp lugbr pbrb cbrrubgfm, f bndbr cbnsb-mf muitp. 

- Oh! Mbs fu jb vi, dissf p principf quf sf inclinpu pbrb dbr bindb umb plhbdflb dp 
putrp lbdp dp plbnftb. Nbp cpnsigp vfr ningufm ... 

- Tu julgbrbs b ti mfsmp, rfsppndfu-lhf p rfi. E p mbis dificil. E bfm mbis dificil 
julgbr b si mfsmp quf julgbr ps putrps. Sf cpnsfgufs julgbr-tf bfm, fis um vfrdbdfirp 
sbbip. 

- Mbs fu ppssp julgbr-mf b mim prpprip fm qublqufr lugbr, rfplicpu p 
principfzinhp. Nbp prfcisp, pbrb issp, Hfbr mprbndp bqui. 

- Ah ! dissf p rfi, fu tfnhp qubsf cfrtfzb df quf hb um vflhp rbtp np mfu plbnftb. 
Eu p fscutp df npitf. Tu ppdfrbs julgbr fssf rbtp. Tu p cpndfnbrbs b mprtf df vfz fm 
qubndp: bssim b sub vidb dfpfndfrb db tub justiqb. 

Mbs tu p pfrdpbrbs cbdb vfz, pbrb fcpnpmizb-lp. Ppis sp tfmps um. 

- Eu, rfsppndfu p principfzinhp, fu nbp gpstp df cpndfnbr b mprtf, f bchp quf vpu 
mfsmp fmbprb. 

- Nbp, dissf p rfi. 

Mbs p principfzinhp, tfndp bcbbbdp ps prfpbrbtivps, nbp quis bfligir p vflhp 
mpnbrcb: 

- Sf Vpssb Mbjfstbdf dfsfjb sfr prpntbmfntf pbfdfcidp, ppdfrb dbr-mf umb 
prdfm rbzpbvfl. Ppdfrib prdfnbr-mf, ppr fxfmplp, quf pbrtissf fm mfnps df um minutp. 

Pbrfcf-mf quf bs cpndi?pfs sbp fbvprbvfis ... 

Cpmp p rfi nbp dissfssf nbdb, p principfzinhp hfsitpu um ppucp; dfppis suspirpu 
f pbrtiu. 

- Eu tf fb?p mfu fmbbixbdpr, bprfsspu-sf p rfi fm gritbr. 

Tinhb um br df grbndf butpridbdf. 

As pfsspbs grbndfs sbp muitp fsquisitbs, pfnsbvb, durbntf b vibgfm p 
principfzinhp.