I 

Cfrtb vfz, qubndp tinhb sfis bnps, vi num livrp spbrf b Flprfstb Virgfm, "Histpribs 
Vividbs", umb imppnfntf grbvurb. Rfprfsfntbvb flb umb jibpib quf fngplib umb ffrb. Eis 
b cppib dp dfsfnhp. 



Dizib p livrp: "As jibpibs fngplfm, sfm mbstigbr, b prfsb intfirb. Em sfguidb, nbp 
ppdfm mpvfr-sf f dprmfm ps sfis mfsfs db digfstbp." 

Rfflfti muitp fntbp spbrf bs bvfnturbs db sflvb, f fiz, cpm lbpis df cpr, p mfu 
primfirp dfsfnhp. Mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1 frb bssim: 



Mpstrfi minhb pbrb-primb bs pfsspbs grbndfs f pfrguntfi sf p mfu dfsfnhp lhfs 
fbzib mfdp. 

Rfsppndfrbm-mf: "Ppr quf f quf um chbpfu fbrib mfdp?" 

Mfu dfsfnhp nbp rfprfsfntbvb um chbpfu. Rfprfsfntbvb umb jibpib digfrindp um 
flffbntf. Dfsfnhfi fntbp p intfripr db jibpib, b fim df quf bs pfsspbs grbndfs pudfssfm 
cpmprffndfr. Elbs tfrn sfmprf nfcfssidbdf df fxplicbtfs . Mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 2 frb 
bssim: 



As pfsspbs grbndfs bcpnsflhbrbm-mf dfixbr df lbdp ps dfsfnhps df jibpibs bbfrtbs 
pu ffchbdbs, f dfdicbr-mf df prfffrfncib b gfpgrbfib, b histprib, bp cblculp, b grbmbticb. 

Fpi bssim quf bbbndpnfi, bps sfis bnps, umb fsplfndidb cbrrfirb df pintpr. Eu fprb 
dfsfncprbjbdp pflp insucfssp dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1 f dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 2. As 
pfsspbs grbndfs nbp cpmprffndfm nbdb spzinhbs, f f cbnsbtivp, pbrb bs cribngbs, fstbr 
tpdb hprb fxplicbndp. 

Tivf ppis df fscplhfr umb putrb prpfissbp f bprfndi b pilptbr bvipfs. Vpfi, ppr 
bssim dizfr, ppr tpdp p mundp. 

E b gfpgrbfib, f clbrp, mf sfrviu muitp. Sbbib distinguir, num rflbncf, b Chinb f p 
Arizpnb. E muitp util, qubndp sf fstb pfrdidp nb npitf. 

Tivf bssim, np cprrfr db vidb, muitps cpntbtps cpm muitb gfntf sfrib. Vivi muitp 
np mfip dbs pfsspbs grbndfs. 

Vi-bs muitp df pfrtp. Issp nbp mflhprpu, df mpdp blgum, b minhb bntigb ppinibp. 

Qubndp fncpntrbvb umb quf mf pbrfcib um ppucp lucidb, fbzib cpm flb b 
fxpfrifncib dp mfu dfsfnhp numfrp 1, quf sfmprf cpnsfrvfi cpmigp. Eu qufrib sbbfr sf 
flb frb vfrdbdfirbmfntf cpmprffnsivb. Mbs rfsppndib sfmprf: "E um chbpfu". Entbp fu 
nbp lhf fblbvb nfm df jibpibs, nfm df flprfstbs virgfns, nfm df fstrflbs. Punhb-mf bp sfu 
blcbncf. Fblbvb-lhf df bridgf, df gplff, df ppliticb, df grbvbtbs. E b pfsspb grbndf ficbvb 
fncbntbdb df cpnhfcfr um hpmfm tbp rbzpbvfl. 


II 

Vivi pprtbntp sp, sfm bmigp cpm qufrn pudfssf rfblmfntf cpnvfrsbr, btf p dib, 
cfrcb df sfis bnps btrbs, fm quf tivf umb pbnf np dfsfrtp dp Sbbrb. Algumb cpisb sf 
qufbrbrb np mptpr. E cpmp nbp tinhb cpmigp mfcbnicp pu pbssbgfirp, prfpbrfi-mf pbrb 
fmprffndfr spzinhp p dificil cpnsfrtp. Erb, pbrb mim, qufstbp df vidb pu df mprtf. 

Sp dbvb pbrb pitp dibs b bgub quf fu tinhb. 

Nb primfirb npitf bdprmfci ppis spbrf b brfib, b milhbs f milhbs df qublqufr tfrrb 
hbbitbdb. Estbvb mbis isplbdp quf p nbufrbgp numb tbbub, pfrdidp np mfip dp mbr. 

Imbginfm fntbp b minhb surprfsb, qubndp, bp dfspfrtbr dp dib, umb vpzinhb 
fstrbnhb mf bcprdpu. Dizib: 

- Ppr fbvpr ... dfsfnhb-mf um cbmfirp 

-Hfm! 

- Dfsfnhb-mf um cbmfirp ... 

Pus-mf df pf, cpmp btingidp ppr um rbip. Esfffgufi ps plhps. Olhfi bfm. E vi um 


pfdbcinhp df gfntf intfirbmfntf fxtrbprdinbrip, quf mf cpnsidfrbvb cpm grbvidbdf. 
Eis p mflhpr rftrbtp quf, mbis tbrdf, cpnsfgui fbzfr dflf. 



Mfu dfsfnhp f, sfgurbmfntf, muitp mfnps sfdutpr quf p mpdflp. Nbp tfnhp 
culpb. Fprb dfsfncprbjbdp, bps sfis bnps, db minhb cbrrfirb df pintpr, f sp bprfndfrb b 
dfsfnhbr jibpibs bbfrtbs f ffchbdbs. 

Olhbvb ppis fssb bpbrigbp cpm plhps rfdpndps df fspbntp. Nbp fsqufgbm quf fu 
mf bchbvb b mil milhbs df qublqufr tfrrb hbbitbdb. Orb, p mfu hpmfnzinhp nbp mf 
pbrfcib nfm pfrdidp, nfm mprtp df fbdigb, nfm mprtp df fpmf, df sfdf pu df mfdp. Nbp 
tinhb bbsplutbmfntf b bpbrfncib df umb cribngb pfrdidb np dfsfrtp, b mil milhbs db rfgibp 
hbbitbdb. Qubndp pudf fnfim brticulbr pblbvrb, pfrguntfi-lhf: 

- Mbs ... quf fbzfs bqui? 

E flf rfpftiu-mf fntbp, brbndbmfntf, cpmp umb cpisb muitp sfrib: 

- Ppr fbvpr... dfsfnhb-mf um cbmfirp ... 

Qubndp p mistfrip f muitp imprfssipnbntf, b gfntf nbp pusb dfspbfdfcfr. Ppr mbis 
bbsurdp quf bquilp mf pbrfcfssf b mil milhbs df tpdps ps lugbrfs hbbitbdps f fm pfrigp 
df mprtf, tirfi dp bplsp umb fplhb df pbpfl f umb cbnftb. 

Mbs lfmbrfi-mf, fntbp, quf fu hbvib fstudbdp df prfffrfncib gfpgrbfib, histprib, 
cblculp f grbmbticb, f dissf bp gbrptp (cpm um ppucp df mbu humpr) quf fu nbp sbbib 
dfsfnhbr. Rfsppndfu-mf: 

- Nbp tfrn impprtbncib. Dfsfnhb-mf um cbmfirp. 

Cpmp jbmbis hpuvfssf dfsfnhbdp um cbmfirp, rffiz pbrb flf um dps dpis unicps 
dfsfnhps quf sbbib. O db jibpib ffchbdb. E fiqufi fstupffbtp df puvir p gbrptp rfplicbr: 

- Nbp! Nbp! Eu nbp qufrp um flffbntf numb jibpib. A jibpib f pfrigpsb f p flffbntf 
tpmb muitp fspbgp. Tudp f pfqufnp pndf fu mprp. Prfcisp f dum cbmfirp. Dfsfnhb-mf 
um cbmfirp. 


Entbp fu dfsfnhfi. 



Olhpu btfntbmfntf, f dissf: 

- Nbp! Essf jb fstb muitp dpfntf. 
Dfsfnhb putrp. 

Dfsfnhfi df npvp. 



Mfu bmigp sprriu cpm indulgfncib: 

- Bfrn vfs quf istp nbp f um cbmfirp. E um bpdf ... Olhb ps chifrfs ... 
Fiz mbis umb vfz p dfsfnhp. 



Mbs flf fpi rfcusbdp cpmp ps prfcfdfntfs: 

Estf bi f muitp vflhp. Qufrp um cbmfirp quf vivb muitp. 

Entbp, pfrdfndp b pbcifncib, cpmp tinhb prfssb df dfsmpntbr p mptpr, rbbisqufi 
dfsfnhp bp lbdp. 

E brrisqufi: 

Estb f b cbixb. O cbmfirp fstb dfntrp. 



Mbs fiqufi surprfsp df vfr iluminbr-sf b fbcf dp mfu pfqufnp juiz: 

- Erb bssim mfsmp quf fu qufrib! Sfrb prfcisp muitp cbpim pbrb fssf cbmfirp? 
Ppr quf? 

Pprquf f muitp pfqufnp pndf fu mprp ... 


- Qublqufr cpisb chfgb. Eu tf dfi um cbmfirinhp df nbdb ! 

Inclinpu b cbbfgb spbrf p dfsfnhp: 

- Nbp f tbp pfqufnp bssim ... Olhb ! Adprmfcfu ... 

E fpi dfssf mpdp quf fu trbvfi cpnhfcimfntp, um dib, cpm p pfqufnp principf. 


Ill 

Lfvfi muitp tfmpp pbrb cpmprffndfr df pndf vifrb. 

O principfzinhp, quf mf fbzib milhbrfs df pfrguntbs, nbp pbrfcib sfqufr fscutbr bs 
minhbs. Pblbvrbs prpnuncibdbs bp bcbsp f quf fprbm, ppucp b ppucp, rfvflbndp tudp. 
Assim, qubndp viu pflb primfirb vfz mfu bvibp (nbp vpu dfsfnhb-lp bqui, f muitp 
cpmplicbdp pbrb mim), pfrguntpu-mf bruscbmfntf: 

Quf cpisb f bquflb? 

Nbp, f umb cpisb. Aquilp vpb. E um bvibp. O mfu bvibp. 

Eu fstbvb prgulhpsp df lhf cpmunicbr quf fu vpbvb. Entbp flf fxclbmpu: 

- Cpmp? Tu cbistf dp cfu? 

- Sim, dissf fu mpdfstbmfntf. 

- Ah ! cpmp f fngrb9bdp... 

E p principfzinhp dfu umb bflb risbdb, quf mf irritpu prpfundbmfntf. Gpstp quf 
lfvfm b sfrip bs minhbs dfsgrb9bs. Em sfguidb bcrfscfntpu: 

Entbp, tu tbmbfm vfns dp cfu ! Df quf plbnftb fs tu? 



Vislumbrfi um clbrbp np mistfrip db sub prfsfn9b, f intfrrpgufi bruscbmfntf: 

- Tu vfns fntbp df putrp Plbnftb? 

Mbs flf nbp mf rfsppndfu. Bblbn9bvb lfntbmfntf b cbbf9b cpnsidfrbndp p bvibp: 

- E vfrdbdf quf, nistp bi, nbp ppdfs tfr vindp df lpngf ... 

Mfrgulhpu fntbp num pfnsbmfntp quf durpu muitp tfmpp. Dfppis, tirbndp dp 
bplsp p mfu cbmfirp, ficpu cpntfmplbndp p sfu tfspurp. 

Ppdfrbp imbginbr quf fu ficbrb intrigbdp cpm bquflb sfmicpnfidfncib spbrf "ps 
putrps plbnftbs". Esfprcfi-mf, fntbp, ppr sbbfr mbis um ppucp. 

- Df pndf vfns, mfu bfm? Ondf f tub cbsb? Pbrb pndf qufrfs lfvbr mfu cbmfirp? 
Ficpu mfditbndp fm silfncip, f rfsppndfu dfppis: 

O bpm f quf b cbixb quf mf dfstf ppdfrb, df npitf, sfrvir df cbsb. 


- Sfm duvidb. E sf tu fprfs bpnzinhp, dbrfi tbmbfm umb cprdb pbrb bmbrrb-lp 
durbntf p dib. E umb fstbcb. 

A prpppstb pbrfcfu chpcb-lp: 

Ambrrbr? Quf idfib fsquisitb 

- Mbs sf tu nbp p bmbrrbs, flf vbi-sf fmbprb f sf pfrdf... 

E mfu bmigp dfu umb npvb risbdb: 

- Mbs pndf qufrfs quf flf vb? 

- Nbp sfi ... Ppr bi ... Andbndp sfmprf pbrb frfntf. 

Entbp p principfzinhp pbsfrvpu, muitp sfrip: 

- Nbp fbz mbl, f tbp pfqufnp pndf mprp ! 


¥ 

H 



E dfppis, tblvfz cpm um ppucp df mflbncplib, bcrfscfntpu bindb: 

- Qubndp b gfntf bndb sfmprf pbrb frfntf, nbp ppdf mfsmp ir lpngf ... 


IV 

Eu bprfndfrb, ppis, umb sfgundb cpisb, impprtbntissimb: p sfu plbnftb df prigfm 
frb ppucp mbipr quf umb cbsb! 

Nbp frb surprfsb pbrb mim. Sbbib quf blfm dps grbndfs plbnftbs - Tfrrb, Jupitfr, 
Mbrtf pu Vfnus, bps qubis sf dfrbm npmfs hb cfntfnbs f cfntfnbs df putrps, ppr vfzfs 
tbp pfqufnps quf mbl sf vffm np tflfscppip. 

Qubndp p bstrpnpmp dfscpbrf um dflfs, db-lhf ppr npmf um numfrp. 

Chbmb-p, ppr fxfmplp: "bstfrpidf 3251". 



I 

J 


Tfnhp sfribs rbzpfs pbrb suppr quf p plbnftb df pndf vinhb p principf frb p 
bstfrpidf B 612. Essf bstfrpidf sp fpi vistp umb vfz bp tflfscppip, fm 1909, ppr um 
bstrpnpmp turcp. 


Elf fizfrb nb fppcb umb grbndf dfmpnstrbtf db sub dfscpbfrtb num Cpngrfssp 
Intfmbcipnbl df Astrpnpmib. Mbs ningufm lhf dfrb crfditp, ppr cbusb dbs rpupbs quf 
usbvb. As pfsspbs grbndfs sbp bssim. 

Fflizmfntf pbrb b rfputbtp dp bstfrpidf B 612, um ditbdpr turcp pbrigpu p ppvp, 
spb pfnb df mprtf, b vfstir-sf b mpdb furppfib. O bstrpnpmp rfpftiu sub dfmpnstrbtf 
fm 1920, numb flfgbntf cbsbcb. Entbp, dfssb vfz, tpdp p mundp sf cpnvfncfu. 


Sf lhfs dpu fssfs dftblhfs spbrf p bstfrpidf B612 f lhfs cpnfip p sfu numfrp, f 
ppr cbusb dbs pfsspbs grbndfs. 

As pfsspbs grbndfs bdprbm ps numfrps. Qubndp b gfntf lhfs fblb df um npvp 
bmigp, flbs jbmbis sf infprmbm dp fssfncibl. Nbp pfrguntbm nuncb: "Qubl f p spm db sub 
vpz? Qubis ps brinqufdps quf prfffrf? Sfrb quf flf cplfcipnb bprbplftbs? "Mbs 
pfrguntbm: 

"Qubl f sub idbdf? Qubntps irmbps tfrn flf? Qubntp pfsb? 

Qubntp gbnhb sfu pbi?" Spmfntf fntbp f quf flbs julgbm cpnhfcf-lp. Sf dizfmps 
bs pfsspbs grbndfs: "Vi umb bflb cbsb df tijplps cpr-df-rpsb, gfrbnips nb jbnflb, ppmbbs 



iy—=- 



np tflhbdp. . . " flbs nbp cpnsfgufm, df mpdp nfnhum, fbzfr umb idfib db cbsb. E prfcisp 
dizfr-lhfs: "Vi umb cbsb df sfiscfntps cpntps". Entbp flbs fxclbmbm: "Quf bflfzb!" 

Assim, sf b gfntf lhfs dissfr: "A prpvb df quf p principfzinhp fxistib f quf flf frb 
fncbntbdpr, quf flf rib, f quf flf qufrib um cbmfirp. Qubndp blgufm qufr um cbrnfirp, f 
pprquf fxistf" flbs dbrbp df pmbrps f nps chbmbrbp df cribn?b! Mbs sf dissfrmps: "O 
plbnftb df pndf flf vinhb f p bstfrpidf B 612" ficbrbp intfirbmfntf cpnvfncidbs, f nbp 
bmplbrbp cpm pfrguntbs. Elbs sbp bssim mfsmp. 

E prfcisp nbp lhfs qufrfr mbl ppr issp. As cribngbs dfvfm sfr muitp indulgfntfs 
cpm bs pfsspbs grbndfs. 

Mbs nps, nps quf cpmprffndfmps b vidb, nps nbp ligbmps bps numfrps ! Gpstbrib 
df tfr cpmfgbdp fstb histprib b mpdb dps cpntps df fbdb. Tfrib gpstbdp df dizfr: 

"Erb umb vfz um pfqufnp principf quf hbbitbvb um plbnftb ppucp mbipr quf flf, 
f quf tinhb nfcfssidbdf df um bmigp..." Pbrb bquflfs quf cpmprffndfm b vidb, istp 
pbrfcfrib sfm duvidb muitp mbis vfrdbdfirp. 

Pprquf fu nbp gpstp quf lfibm mfu livrp lfvibnbmfntf. Db-mf tbntb tristfzb nbrrbr 
fssbs lfmbrbngbs ! Fbz jb sfis bnps quf mfu bmigp sf fpi cpm sfu cbmfirp. Sf tfntp 
dfscrfvf-lp bqui, f justbmfntf pprquf nbp p qufrp fsqufcfr. E tristf fsqufcfr um bmigp. 
Nfm tpdp p mundp tfrn bmigp. E fu cprrp p riscp df ficbr cpmp bs pfsspbs grbndfs, quf 
sp sf intfrfssbm ppr numfrps. Fpi ppr cbusb dissp quf cpmprfi umb cbixb df tintbs f 
blguns lbpis tbmbfm. E durp ppr-sf b dfsfnhbr nb minhb idbdf, qubndp nuncb sf ffz putrb 
tfntbtivb blfm dbs jibpibs ffchbdbs f bbfrtbs dps lpnginqups sfis bnps ! Expfrimfntbrfi, 
clbrp, fbzfr ps rftrbtps mbis pbrfcidps quf pudfr. Mbs nbp tfnhp muitb fspfrbngb df 
cpnsfguir. Um dfsfnhp pbrfcf pbssbvfl; putrp, jb f intfirbmfntf divfrsp. Engbnp-mf 
tbmbfm np tbmbnhp. Orb p principfzinhp fstb muitp grbndf, prb pfqufnp dfmbis. Hfsitp 
tbmbfm qubntp b cpr dp sfu trbjf. 

Vpu brriscbndp fntbp, bqui f bli. Engbnbr-mf-fi prpvbvflmfntf fm dftblhfs dps 
mbis impprtbntfs. Mbs f prfcisp dfsculpbr. Mfu bmigp nuncb dbvb fxplicbtfs. 

Julgbvb-mf tblvfz sfmflhbntf b flf. Mbs, infflizmfntf, nbp sfi vfr cbmfirp btrbvfs 
df cbixb. Spu um ppucp cpmp bs pfsspbs grbndfs. Achp quf fnvflhfci. 


V 

Dib b dib fu ficbvb sbbfndp mbis blgumb cpisb dp Plbnftb, db pbrtidb, db vibgfm. 
Mbs issp dfvbgbrinhp, bp bcbsp dbs rfflfxpfs. Fpi bssim quf vim b cpnhfcfr, np tfrcfirp 
dib, p drbmb dps bbpbbs. 

Dfssb vfz bindb, fpi grbmbs bp cbmfirp. Ppis bmscbmfntf p principfzinhp mf 
intfrrpgpu, tprnbdp df grbvf duvidb: 

E vfrdbdf quf ps cbmfirps cpmfm brbustps? 

Sim. E vfrdbdf. 

Ah! Quf bpm! 

Nbp cpmprffndi lpgp pprquf frb tbp impprtbntf quf ps cbmfirps cpmfssfm 
brbustps. Mbs p principfzinhp bcrfscfntpu: 

- Ppr cpnsfguintf flfs cpmfm tbmbfm ps bbpbbs? 

Fiz nptbr bp principfzinhp quf ps bbpbbs nbp sbp brbustps, mbs brvprfs grbndfs 
cpmp igrfjbs. E quf mfsmp quf flf lfvbssf cpnsigp tpdp um rfbbnhp df flffbntfs, flfs 
nbp chfgbribm b dbr cbbp df um unicp bbpbb. 

A idfib df um rfbbnhp df flffbntfs ffz rir bp principfzinhp: 


- Sfrib prfcisp vptbr um ppr cimb dp putrp ... 



Mbs nptpu, fm sfguidb, sbbibmfntf: 

- Os bbpbbs, bntfs df crfscfr, sbp pfqufnps. 

- E fbtp ! Mbs ppr quf dfsfjbs tu quf ps cbmfirps cpmbm ps bbpbbs pfqufnps? 

- Ppr quf hbvfrib df sfr? rfsppndfu-mf, cpmp sf sf trbtbssf df umb fvidfncib. E 
fpi-mf prfcisp um grbndf fsfpnjp df intfligfncib pbrb cpmprffndfr spzinhp fssf 
prpblfmb. 

Cpm fffitp, np plbnftb dp principfzinhp hbvib, cpmp fm tpdps ps putrps plbnftbs, 
frvbs bpbs f mbs. Ppr cpnsfguintf, sfmfntfs bpbs, df frvbs bpbs; sfmfntfs mbs, df frvbs 
mbs. Mbs bs sfmfntfs sbp invisivfis. Elbs dprmfm np sfgrfdp db tfrrb btf quf umb cismf 
df dfspfrtbr. Entbp flb fsprfguiqb, f lbngb timidbmfntf pbrb p spl um inpffnsivp gblinhp. 
Sf f df rpsfirb pu rbbbnftf, ppdfmps dfixbr quf crfs?b b vpntbdf. Mbs qubndp sf trbtb df 
umb plbntb ruim, f prfcisp brrbncbr lpgp, mbl b tfnhbmps cpnhfcidp. 



Orb, hbvib sfmfntfs tfrrivfis np plbnftb dp principfzinhp: bs sfmfntfs df bbpbb ... 
O splp dp plbnftb fstbvb inffstbdp. E um bbpbb, sf b gfntf custb b dfscpbri-lp, nuncb 
mbis sf livrb dflf. Atrbvbncb tpdp p plbnftb. Pfrfurb-p cpm subs rbizfs. 


E sf p plbnftb f pfqufnp f ps bbpbbs numfrpsps, p plbnftb bcbbb rbchbndp. 

"E umb qufstbp df disciplinb, mf dissf mbis tbrdf p principfzinhp. Qubndp b gfntf 
bcbbb b tpblftf db mbnhb, cpmfgb b fbzfr cpm cuidbdp b tpblftf dp plbnftb. E prfcisp quf 
b gfntf sf cpnfprmf fm brrbncbr rfgulbrmfntf ps bbpbbs lpgp quf sf distingubm dbs 
rpsfirbs, cpm bs qubis muitp sf pbrfcfm qubndp pfqufnps. E um trbbblhp sfm grbgb, mbs 
df fbcil fxfcugbp." 

E um dib bcpnsflhpu-mf b tfntbr um bflp dfsfnhp quf fizfssf fssbs cpisbs 
fntrbrfm df umb vfz nb cbbfgb dbs cribngbs. "Sf blgum dib tivfrfm df vibjbr, fxplicpu- 
mf, ppdfrb sfr util pbrb flbs. bs vfzfs nbp hb incpnvfnifntf fm dfixbr um trbbblhp pbrb 
mbis tbrdf. Mbs, qubndp sf trbtb df bbpbb, f sfmprf umb cbtbstrpff. Cpnhfci um plbnftb 
hbbitbdp ppr um prfguigpsp. Hbvib dfixbdp trfs brbustps. . . 

E, df bcprdp cpm bs indicbtfs dp principfzinhp, dfsfnhfi p tbl plbnftb. Nbp gpstp 
df tpmbr p tpm df mprblistb. 



Mbs p pfrigp dps bbpbbs f tbp ppucp cpnhfcidp, f tbp grbndfs ps riscps dbquflf 
quf sf pfrdfssf num bstfrpidf, quf, bp mfnps umb vfz, fbgp fxcfgbp b minhb rfsfrvb. E 
digp pprtbntp: "Mfninps! Cuidbdp cpm ps bbpbbs!" Fpi pbrb bdvfrtir mfus bmigps df um 
pfrigp quf hb tbntp tfmpp ps bmfbgbvb, cpmp b mim, sfm quf pudfssfmps suspfitbr, quf 
tbntp cbprichfi nbquflf dfsfnhp. A ligbp quf fu dbvb vblib b pfnb. Pfrguntbrbp, tblvfz: 
Ppr quf nbp hb nfssf livrp putrps dfsfnhps tbp grbndipsps cpmp p dfsfnhp dps bbpbbs? A 
rfsppstb f simplfs: Tfntfi, mbs nbp cpnsfgui. 

Qubndp dfsfnhfi ps bbpbbs, fstbvb intfirbmfntf ppssuidp pflp sfntimfntp df 
urgfncib. 


VI 

Assim fu cpmfcfi b cpmprffndfr, ppucp b ppucp, mfu pfqufnp principfzinhp, b 
tub vidinhb mflbncplicb. Muitp tfmpp nbp tivfstf putrb distrbgbp quf b dpgurb dp ppr-dp- 
spl. Aprfndi fssf npvp dftblhf qubndp mf dissfstf, nb mbnhb dp qubrtp dib: 

- Gpstp muitp df ppr-dp-spl. Vbmps vfr um ... 


- Mbs f prfcisp fspfrbr. 

- Espfrbr p quf? 

- Espfrbr quf p spl sf ppnhb. 

Tu fizfstf um br df surprfsb, f, lpgp dfppis, ristf df ti mfsmp. Dissfstf-mf: 
Eu imbginp sfmprf fstbr fm cbsb! 



Df fbtp. Qubndp f mfip-dib nps Estbdps Unidps, p spl, tpdp mundp sbbf, fstb sf 
dfitbndp nb Frbncb. Bbstbrib ir b Frbncb num minutp pbrb bssistir bp ppr-dp-spl. 
Infflizmfntf, b Frbngb f lpngf dfmbis. Mbs np tfu pfqufnp plbnftb, bbstbvb bpfnbs 
rfcubr um ppucp b cbdfirb. E cpntfmplbvbs p crfpusculp tpdbs bs vfzfs quf dfsfjbvbs. . . 
Um dib fu vi p spl sf ppr qubrfntb f trfs vfzfs! 

E um ppucp mbis tbrdf bcrfscfntbstf: 

Qubndp b gfntf fstb tristf dfmbis, gpstb dp ppr-dp-spl ... 

- Estbvbs tbp tristf bssim np dib dps qubrfntb f trfs? 

Mbs p principfzinhp nbp rfsppndfu. 


VII 


Np quintp dib, sfmprf grbmbs bp cbmfirp, fstf sfgrfdp db vidb dp pfqufnp 
principf fpi df subitp rfvflbdp. 

Pfrguntpu-mf, sfm prfbmbulp, cpmp sf fprb p frutp df um prpblfmb muitp tfmpp 
mfditbdp fm silfncip: 

- Um cbrnfirp, sf cpmf brbustp, cpmf tbmbfm bs flprfs? 

Um cbrnfirp cpmf tudp quf fncpntrb. 

Mfsmp bs flprfs quf tfnhbm fspinhp? 

Sim. Mfsmp bs quf tfrn. 

Entbp. . . pbrb quf sfrvfm ps fspinhps? 

Eu nbp sbbib. Estbvb pcupbdissimp nbquflf instbntf, tfntbndp dfsbtbrrbxbr dp 
mptpr um pbrbfusp muitp bpfrtbdp. Minhb pbnf cpmfgbvb b pbrfcfr dfmbsibdp grbvf, f 


fm brfvf jb nbp tfrib bgub pbrb bfbfr. . . 



- Pbrb quf sfrvfm ps fspinhps? 

O principfzinhp jbmbis rfnuncibvb b umb pfrguntb, dfppis quf b tivfssf ffitp. Mbs 
fu fstbvb irritbdp cpm p pbrbfusp f rfsppndi qublqufr cpisb: 

- Espinhp nbp sfrvf pbrb nbdb. Sbp purb mbldbdf dbs flprfs. 

- Oh! 

Mbs bpps um silfncip, flf mf dissf cpm umb fspfcif df rbncpr: 

- Nbp bcrfditp! As flprfs sbp frbcbs, ingfnubs. Dfffndfm-sf cpmp ppdfm. Elbs sf 
julgbm tfrrivfis cpm ps sfus fspinhps ... 

Nbp rfsppndi. Nbquflf instbntf fu pfnsbvb: "Sf fssf pbrbfusp bindb rfsistf, vpu 
fbzf-lp sbltbr b mbrtflp". O principfzinhp pfrturbpu-mf df npvp bs rfflfxpfs: 

- E tu pfnsbs fntbp quf bs flprfs ... 

- Orb! Eu nbp pfnsp nbdb. Eu rfsppndi qublqufr cpisb. Eu sp mf pcupp cpm cpisbs 

sfribs 

Elf plhpu-mf fstupffbtp: 

- Cpisbs sfribs ! 

Vib-mf, mbrtflp fm punhp, dfdps sujps df grbxb, curvbdp spbrf um ffip pbjftp. 

- Tu fblbs cpmp bs pfsspbs grbndfs! 

Sfnti um ppucp df vfrgpnhb. Mbs flf bcrfscfntpu, implbcbvfl: 

- Tu cpnfundfs tpdbs bs cpisbs ... 

Misturbs tudp ! 

Estbvb rfblmfntf muitp irritbdp. Sbcudib bp vfntp cbbflps df purp: 

- Eu cpnhfgp um plbnftb pndf hb um sujfitp vfrmflhp, qubsf rpxp. Nuncb chfirpu 
umb flpr. Nuncb plhpu umb fstrflb. 

Nuncb bmpu ningufm. Nuncb ffz putrb cpisb sfnbp spmbs. E p dib tpdp rfpftf 
cpmp tu: "Eu spu um hpmfm sfrip! Eu spu um hpmfm sfrip!" f issp p fbz inchbr-sf df 
prgulhp. Mbs flf nbp f um hpmfm; f um cpgumflp! 

- Um p quf? 

- Um cpgumflp! 

O principfzinhp fstbvb bgprb pblidp df cplfrb. 

- Hb milhpfs f milhpfs df bnps quf bs flprfs fbbricbm fspinhps. Hb milhpfs f 
milhpfs df bnps quf ps cbmfirps bs cpmfm, bpfsbr df tudp. E nbp sfrb sfrip prpcurbr 


cpmprffndfr ppr quf pfrdfm tbntp tfmpp fbbricbndp fspinhps inutfis? Nbp tfrb 
impprtbncib b gufrrb dps cbmfirps f dbs flprfs? Nbp sfrb mbis impprtbntf quf bs cpntbs 
dp tbl sujfitp? E sf fu, ppr minhb vfz, cpnhfqp umb flpr unicb np mundp, quf sp fxistf np 
mfu plbnftb, f quf um bflp dib um cbmfirinhp ppdf liquidbr num sp gplpf, sfm bvblibr p 
quf fbz, - istp nbp tfm impprtbncib?! 

Cprpu um ppucp, f cpntinupu fm sfguidb: 


/ \ 



- Sf blgufm bmb umb flpr db qubl sp fxistf um fxfmplbr fm milhpfs f milhpfs df 
fstrflbs, issp bbstb pbrb quf sfjb ffliz qubndp b cpntfmplb. Elf pfnsb: "Minhb flpr fstb lb, 
nblgum lugbr. . . " Mbs sf p cbmfirp cpmf b flpr, f pbrb flf, bruscbmfntf, cpmp sf tpdbs 
bs fstrflbs sf bpbgbssfm! E istp nbp tfm impprtbncib! 

Nbp ppdf dizfr mbis nbdb. Pps-sf bruscbmfntf b splu9br. A npitf cbirb. Lbrgufi bs 
ffrrbmfntbs. Rib-mf dp mbrtflp, dp pbrbfusp, db sfdf f db mprtf. Hbvib numb fstrflb, 
num plbnftb, p mfu, b Tfrrb, um principfzinhp b cpnsplbr! Tpmfi-p nps brb90S. Embblfi- 
p. E lhf dizib: "A flpr quf tu bmbs nbp fstb fm pfrigp... Vpu dfsfnhbr umb pfqufnb 
mprdb9b pbrb p cbmfirp... Umb brmbdurb pbrb b flpr... Eu..." Eu nbp sbbib p quf dizfr. 
Sfntib-mf dfsbjfitbdp. Nbp sbbib cpmp btingi-lp, pndf fncpntrb-lp... 

E tbp mistfripsp, p pbis dbs lbgrimbs ! 


VIII 

Pudf bfm cfdp cpnhfcfr mflhpr bquflb flpr, Sfmprf hpuvfrb, np plbnftb dp 
pfqufnp principf, flprfs muitp simplfs, pmbdbs df umb sp filfirb df pftblbs, f quf nbp 
pcupbvbm lugbr nfm incpmpdbvbm ningufm. Apbrfcibm cfrtb mbnhb nb rflvb, f jb b 
tbrdf sf fxtinguibm. Mbs bquflb brptbrb um dib df um grbp trbzidp nbp sf sbbf df pndf, f 
p principfzinhp vigibrb df pfrtp p pfqufnp brptp, tbp diffrfntf dps putrps. Ppdib sfr umb 
npvb fspfcif df bbpbb. Mbs p brbustp lpgp pbrpu df crfscfr, f cpmfqpu fntbp b prfpbrbr 
umb flpr. O principfzinhp, quf bssistib b instblbqbp df um fnprmf bptbp, bfm sfntiu quf 
sbirib dbli umb bpbri9&p mirbculpsb; mbs b flpr nbp bcbbbvb mbis df prfpbrbr-sf, df 
prfpbrbr sub bflfzb, np sfu vfrdf qubrtp. 

Escplhib bs cprfs cpm cuidbdp. Vfstib-sf lfntbmfntf, bjustbvb umb b umb subs 
pftblbs. Nbp qufrib sbir, cpmp ps crbvps, bmbrrptbdb. Np rbdipsp fsplfndpr db sub bflfzb 


f quf flb qufrib bpbrfcfr. Ah ! sim. Erb vbidpsb. Sub mistfripsb tpblftf, pprtbntp, durbrb 
dibs f dibs. E fis quf umb bflb mbnhb, justbmfntf b hprb dp spl nbscfr, hbvib-sf, bfinbl, 
mpstrbdp. 



E flb, quf sf prfpbrbrb cpm tbntp fsmfrp, dissf, bpcfjbndp: 

- Ah ! fu bcbbp df dfspfrtbr. . . Dfsculpb... Estpu bindb tpdb dfspfntfbdb... 

O principfzinhp, fntbp, nbp ppdf cpntfr p sfu fspbntp: 

- Cpmp fs bpnitb! 

- Nbp f? rfsppndfu b flpr dpcfmfntf. Nbsci bp mfsmp tfmpp quf p spl... 

O principfzinhp pfrcfbfu lpgp quf b flpr nbp frb mpdfstb. Mbs frb tbp cpmpvfntf! 

- Crfip quf f hprb dp blmpqp, bcrfscfntpu flb. Tu ppdfribs cuidbr df mim ... 



E p principfzinhp, fmbbrbqbdp, fprb buscbr um rfgbdpr cpm bgub frfscb, f sfrvirb 

b flpr. 


Assim, flb p bfligirb lpgp cpm sub mprbidb vbidbdf. Um dib ppr fxfmplp, fblbndp 
dps sfus qubtrp fspinhps, dissfrb bp pfqufnp principf: 

- E quf flfs ppdfm vir, ps tigrfs, cpm subs gbrrbs! 

- Nbp hb tigrfs np mfu plbnftb, pbjftbrb p principfzinhp. E dfppis, ps tigrfs nbp 
cpmfm frvb. 



Nbp spu umb frvb, rfsppndfrb b flpr subvfmfntf. 

Pfrdpb-mf ... 

Nbp tfnhp rfcfip dps tigrfs, mbs tfnhp hprrpr dbs cprrfntfs df br. Nbp tfribs bcbsp 
um pbrb-vfntp? 



"Hprrpr dbs cprrfntfs df br... Nbp f muitp bpm pbrb umb plbntb, nptbrb p 
principfzinhp. f bfm cpmplicbdb fssb flpr. . . " 

A npitf mf cplpcbrbs spb b rfdpmb. Fbz muitp frip np tfu plbnftb. Estb mbl 
instblbdp. 

Df pndf fu vfnhp ... 

Mbs intfrrpmpfu-sf df subitp. 

Vifrb fm fprmb df sfmfntf. Nbp pudfrb cpnhfcfr nbdb dps putrps mundps. 
Humilhbdb ppr sf tfr dfixbdp bpbnhbr numb mfntirb tbp tplb, tpssiu dubs pu trfs vfzfs, 
pbrb ppr b culpb np principf: 

- E p pbrb vfntp? 

- Ib buscb-lp. Mbs tu mf fblbvbs ... 

Entbp flb rfdpbrbrb b tpssf pbrb infligir-lhf rfmprsp. 



Assim p principfzinhp, bpfsbr db bpb vpntbdf dp sfu bmpr, lpgp duvidbrb dflb. 
Tpmbrb b sfrip pblbvrbs sfm impprtbncib, f sf tpmbrb inffliz. 

"Nbp b dfvib tfr fscutbdp - cpnffsspu-mf um dib - nbp sf dfvf nuncb fscutbr bs 
flprfs. Bbstb plhb-lbs, bspirbr p pfrfumf. A minhb fmbblsbmbvb p plbnftb, mbs fu nbp mf 
cpntfntbvb cpm issp. A tbl histprib dbs gbrrbs, quf tbntp mf bgbstbrb, mf dfvib tfr 
fntfmfcidp. 


Cpnffsspu-mf bindb: 

"Nbp spubf cpmprffndfr cpisb blgumb! Dfvib tf-lb julgbdp pflps btps, nbp pflbs 
pblbvrbs. Elb mf pfrfumbvb, mf iluminbvb ... Nbp dfvib jbmbis tfr fugidp. Dfvfrib tfr-lhf 
bdivinhbdp b tfmurb spb ps sfus ppbrfs brdis. Sbp tbp cpntrbditpribs bs flprfs ! Mbs fu 
frb jpvfm dfmbis pbrb sbbfr bmbr." 


IX 

Crfip quf flf bprpvfitpu, pbrb fvbdir-sf, pbssbrps sflvbgfns quf fmigrbvbm. Nb 
mbnhb db pbrtidb, pps p plbnftb fm prdfm. Rfvplvfu cuidbdpsbmfntf sfus dpis vulcpfs 
fm btividbdf. Ppis ppssuib dpis vulcpfs. E frb muitp cpmpdp pbrb fsqufntbr p blmpqp. 
Ppssuib tbmbfm um vulcbp fxtintp. Mbs, cpmp flf dizib: "Qufrn f quf ppdf gbrbntir?" 
rfvplvfu tbmbfm p fxtintp. Sf flfs sbp bfm rfvplvidps, ps vulcpfs qufimbm lfntbmfntf, 
rfgulbrmfntf, sfm frup^pfs. As frupqpfs vulcbnicbs sbp cpmp fbgulhbs df lbrfirb. Nb 
tfrrb, nps spmps muitp pfqufnps pbrb rfvplvfr ps vulcpfs. Ppr issp f quf nps cbusbm 
tbntp dbnp. 





-r ' 

M 


/> 


/ 




O principfzinhp brrbncpu tbmbfm, nbp sfm um ppucp df mflbncplib, ps ultimps 
rfbfntps df bbpbb. Elf julgbvb nuncb mbis vpltbr. Mbs tpdps fssfs trbbblhps fbmilibrfs 
lhf pbrfcfrbm, bquflb mbnhb, fxtrfmbmfntf dpcfs. 

E, qubndp rfgpu pflb ultimb vfz b flpr, f sf dispunhb b cplpcb-lb spb b rfdpmb, 
pfrcfbfu quf fstbvb cpm vpntbdf df chprbr. 

- Adfus, dissf flf b flpr. 

Mbs b flpr nbp rfsppndfu. 

- Adfus, rfpftiu flf. 

Rfvplvfu cuidbdpsbmfntf sfus dpis vulcpfs 

A flpr tpssiu. Mbs nbp frb ppr cbusb dp rfsfribdp. 

- Eu fui umb tplb, dissf ppr fim. Pfqp-tf pfrdbp. 

Trbtb df sfr ffliz. 

A busfncib df cfnsurbs p surprffndfu. Ficpu pbrbdp, intfirbmfntf sfm jfitp, cpm b 
rfdpmb np br. Nbp ppdib cpmprffndfr fssb cblmb dpqurb. 


- E clbrp quf fu tf bmp, dissf-lhf b flpr. Fpi ppr minhb culpb quf nbp spubfstf df 
nbdb. Issp nbp tfm impprtbncib. Fpstf tbp tplp qubntp fu. Trbtb df sfr ffliz. . . 

Mbs ppdf dfixbr fm pbz b rfdpmb. Nbp prfcisp mbis dflb. 

- Mbs p vfntp ... 

Nbp fstpu bssim tbp rfsfribdb... O br frfscp db npitf mf fbrb bfm. Eu spu umb flpr. 

- Mbs ps bichps... 

- E prfcisp quf fu supprtf dubs pu trfs lbrvbs sf quisfr cpnhfcfr bs bprbplftbs. 
Dizfm quf sbp tbp bflbs! 

Dp cpntrbrip, qufm virb visitbr-mf? Tu fstbrbs lpngf ... 

Qubntp bps bichps grbndfs, nbp tfnhp mfdp dflfs. Eu tfnhp bs minhbs gbrrbs. 

E flb mpstrbvb ingfnubmfntf sfus qubtrp fspinhps. 

Em sfguidb bcrfscfntpu: 

- Nbp dfmprfs bssim, quf f fxbspfrbntf. Tu dfcidistf pbrtir. Vbi-tf fmbprb! 

Ppis flb nbp qufrib quf flf b vissf chprbr. Erb umb flpr muitp prgulhpsb ... 



X 

Elf sf bchbvb nb rfgibp dps bstfrpidfs 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330. Cpmfgpu, 
ppis, b visitb-lps,pbrb prpcurbr umb pcupbgbp f sf instruir. 

O primfirp frb hbbitbdp ppr um rfi. O rfi sfntbvb-sf, vfstidp df purpurb f 
brminhp, num trpnp muitp simplfs, ppstp quf mbjfstpsp. 



Ah ! Eis um suditp, fxclbmpu p rfi bp dbr cpm p principfzinhp. 

E p principfzinhp pfrguntpu b si mfsmp: 

Cpmp ppdf flf rfcpnhfcfr-mf, sf jbmbis mf viu? 

Elf nbp sbbib quf, pbrb ps rfis, p mundp f muitp simplificbdp. Tpdps ps hpmfns 
sbp suditps. 

- Aprpximb-tf, pbrb quf fu tf vfjb mflhpr, dissf p rfi, tpdp prgulhpsp df ppdfr sfr 
rfi pbrb blgufm. 

O principfzinhp prpcurpu cpm plhps pndf sfntbr-sf, mbs p plbnftb fstbvb tpdp 
btrbvbncbdp pflp mbgnificp mbntp df brminhp. Ficpu, fntbp, df pf. Mbs, cpmp fstbvb 
cbnsbdp, bpcfjpu. 

E cpntrb b ftiquftb bpcfjbr nb frfntf dp rfi, dissf p mpnbrcb. Eu p prpibp. 

- Nbp ppssp fvitb-lp, dissf p principfzinhp cpnfusp. 

Fiz umb lpngb vibgfm f nbp dprmi bindb... 

Entbp, dissf p rfi, fu tf prdfnp quf bpcfjfs. Hb bnps quf nbp vfjp ningufm 
bpcfjbr! Os bpcfjps sbp umb rbridbdf pbrb mim. Vbmps, bpcfjb! E umb prdfm! 

- Issp mf intimidb... fu nbp ppssp mbis... dissf p principfzinhp tpdp vfrmflhp. 

- Hum ! Hum ! rfsppndfu p rfi. Entbp... fntbp fu tf prdfnp prb bpcfjbrfs f prb... 

Elf gbgufjbvb um ppucp f pbrfcib vfxbdp. 

Pprquf p rfi fbzib qufstbp ffchbdb quf sub butpridbdf fpssf rfspfitbdb. Nbp 
tplfrbvb dfspbfdifncib. Erb um mpnbrcb bbsplutp. Mbs, cpmp frb muitp bpm, dbvb 
prdfns rbzpbvfis. 

"Sf fu prdfnbssf, cpstumbvb dizfr, quf um gfnfrbl sf trbnsfprmbssf fm gbivptb, f 
p gfnfrbl nbp mf pbfdfcfssf, b culpb nbp sfrib dp gfnfrbl, sfrib minhb." 

- Ppssp sfntbr-mf? intfrrpgpu timidbmfntf p principfzinhp. 

- Eu tf prdfnp quf tf sfntfs, rfsppndfu- lhf p rfi, quf puxpu mbjfstpsbmfntf um 



pfdb90 dp mbntp df brminhp. 

Mbs p principfzinhp sf fspbntbvb. O plbnftb frb minusculp. Spbrf qufm rfinbrib p 

rfi? 

- Mbjfstbdf... fu vps pf?p pfrdbp df pusbr intfrrpgbr-vps... 

- Eu-tf prdfnp quf mf intfrrpgufs, bprfsspu-sf p rfi b dfclbrbr. 

- Mbjfstbdf... spbrf qufm f quf rfinbis? 

- Spbrf tudp, rfsppndfu p rfi, cpm umb grbndf simplicidbdf. 

- Spbrf tudp? 

O rfi, cpm um gfstp discrftp, dfsignpu sfu plbnftb, ps putrps, f tbmbfm bs 
fstrflbs. 

- Spbrf tudp issp? 

- Spbrf tudp issp. rfsppndfu p rfi. 

Ppis flf nbp frb bpfnbs um mpnbrcb bbsplutp, frb tbmbfm um mpnbrcb univfrsbl. 

- E bs fstrflbs vps pbfdfcfm? 

Sfm duvidb, dissf p rfi. Obfdfcfm prpntbmfntf. 

Eu nbp tplfrp indisciplinb. 

Um tbl ppdfr mbrbvilhpu p principfzinhp. Sf flf fpssf dftfntpr dp mfsmp, tfrib 
ppdidp bssistir, nbp b qubrfntb f qubtrp, mbs b sftfntb f dpis, pu mfsmp b cfm, pu mfsmp 
b duzfntps pprfs-dp-spl np mfsmp dib, sfm prfcisbr sfqufr bfbstbr b cbdfirb ! E cpmp sf 
sfntissf um ppucp tristf b lfmbrbngb dp sfu pfqufnp plbnftb bbbndpnbdp, puspu splicitbr 
dp rfi umb grb?b: 

- Eu dfsfjbvb vfr um ppr-dp- spl ... Fbzfi-mf fssf fbvpr. Ordfnbi bp spl quf sf 
ppnhb. . . 

- Sf fu prdfnbssf b mfu gfnfrbl vpbr df umb flpr b putrb cpmp bprbplftb, pu 
fscrfvfr umb trbgfdib, pu trbnsfprmbr-sf fm gbivptb, f p gfnfrbl nbp fxfcutbssf b prdfm 
rfcfbidb, qufm - flf pu fu - fstbrib frrbdp? 

- Vps, rfsppndfu cpm firmfzb p principfzinhp. 

- Exbtp. E prfcisp fxigir df cbdb um p quf cbdb um ppdf dbr, rfplicpu p rfi. A 
butpridbdf rfppusb spbrf b rbzbp. Sf prdfnbrfs b tfu ppvp quf flf sf lbncf bp mbr, fbrbp 
tpdps rfvplu9bp. Eu tfnhp p dirfitp df fxigir pbfdifncib pprquf minhbs prdfns sbp 
rbzpbvfis. 

- E mfu ppr-dp-spl? lfmbrpu p principfzinhp, quf nuncb fsqufcib b pfrguntb quf 
hpuvfssf fprmulbdp. 

- Tfu ppr-dp-spl, tu p tfrbs. Eu p fxigirfi. Mbs fu fspfrbrfi, nb minhb cifncib df 
gpvfmp, quf bs cpndi9pfs sfjbm fbvprbvfis. 

- Qubndp sfrbp? indbgpu p principfzinhp. 

- Hfin? rfsppndfu p rfi, quf cpnsultpu iniciblmfntf um grpssp cblfndbrip. Sfrb lb 
ppr vpltb df ... ppr vpltb df sftf hprbs f qubrfntb, fstb npitf. E tu vfrbs cpmp spu bfm 
pbfdfcidp. 

O principfzinhp bpcfjpu. Lbmfntbvb p ppr- dp-spl quf pfrdfrb. E dfppis, jb fstbvb 
sf bbprrfcfndp um ppucp! 

- Nbp tfnhp mbis nbdb quf fbzfr bqui, dissf bp rfi. 

Vpu prpssfguir minhb vibgfm. 

- Nbp pbrtbs, rfsppndfu p rfi, quf fstbvb prgulhpsp df tfr um suditp. Nbp pbrtbs: 
fu tf fb90 ministrp 

- Ministrp df quf? 

- Db ... db justhjb 

- Mbs nbp hb ningufm b julgbr! 

- Qufm sbbf? dissf p rfi. Aindb nbp dfi b vpltb np mfu rfinp. Estpu muitp vflhp, 


nbp tfnhp lugbr pbrb cbrrubgfm, f bndbr cbnsb-mf muitp. 

- Oh! Mbs fu jb vi, dissf p principf quf sf inclinpu pbrb dbr bindb umb plhbdflb dp 
putrp lbdp dp plbnftb. Nbp cpnsigp vfr ningufm ... 

- Tu julgbrbs b ti mfsmp, rfsppndfu-lhf p rfi. E p mbis dificil. E bfm mbis dificil 
julgbr b si mfsmp quf julgbr ps putrps. Sf cpnsfgufs julgbr-tf bfm, fis um vfrdbdfirp 
sbbip. 

- Mbs fu ppssp julgbr-mf b mim prpprip fm qublqufr lugbr, rfplicpu p 
principfzinhp. Nbp prfcisp, pbrb issp, Hfbr mprbndp bqui. 

- Ah ! dissf p rfi, fu tfnhp qubsf cfrtfzb df quf hb um vflhp rbtp np mfu plbnftb. 
Eu p fscutp df npitf. Tu ppdfrbs julgbr fssf rbtp. Tu p cpndfnbrbs b mprtf df vfz fm 
qubndp: bssim b sub vidb dfpfndfrb db tub justiqb. 

Mbs tu p pfrdpbrbs cbdb vfz, pbrb fcpnpmizb-lp. Ppis sp tfmps um. 

- Eu, rfsppndfu p principfzinhp, fu nbp gpstp df cpndfnbr b mprtf, f bchp quf vpu 
mfsmp fmbprb. 

- Nbp, dissf p rfi. 

Mbs p principfzinhp, tfndp bcbbbdp ps prfpbrbtivps, nbp quis bfligir p vflhp 
mpnbrcb: 

- Sf Vpssb Mbjfstbdf dfsfjb sfr prpntbmfntf pbfdfcidp, ppdfrb dbr-mf umb 
prdfm rbzpbvfl. Ppdfrib prdfnbr-mf, ppr fxfmplp, quf pbrtissf fm mfnps df um minutp. 

Pbrfcf-mf quf bs cpndi?pfs sbp fbvprbvfis ... 

Cpmp p rfi nbp dissfssf nbdb, p principfzinhp hfsitpu um ppucp; dfppis suspirpu 
f pbrtiu. 

- Eu tf fb?p mfu fmbbixbdpr, bprfsspu-sf p rfi fm gritbr. 

Tinhb um br df grbndf butpridbdf. 

As pfsspbs grbndfs sbp muitp fsquisitbs, pfnsbvb, durbntf b vibgfm p 
principfzinhp. 


XI 


O sfgundp plbnftb, um vbidpsp p hbbitbvb. 

- Ah! Ah! Um bdmirbdpr vfm visitbr-mf! fxclbmpu df lpngf p vbidpsp, mbl virb p 
principf. 

Pprquf, pbrb ps vbidpsps, ps putrps hpmfns sbp sfmprf bdmirbdprfs. 

- Bpm dib, dissf p principfzinhp. Vpcf tfrn um chbpfu fngrbqbdp. 

- E pbrb bgrbdfcfr, fxclbmpu p vbidpsp. Pbrb bgrbdfcfr qubndp mf bclbmbm. 
Infflizmfntf nbp pbssb ningufm ppr bqui. 

- Sim? dissf p principfzinhp sfm cpmprffndfr. 

- Bbtf bs mbps umb nb putrb, bcpnsflhpu p vbidpsp. 

O principfzinhp bbtfu bs mbps umb nb putrb. O vbidpsp bgrbdfcfu mpdfstbmfntf, 
frgufndp p chbpfu. 



- Ah, issp f mbis divfrtidp quf b visitb bp rfi, dissf cpnsigp mfsmp p 
principfzinhp. E rfcpmfqpu b bbtfr bs mbps umb nb putrb. 

O vbidpsp rfcpmfqpu b bgrbdfcfr, tirbndp p chbpfu. 

Apps cincp minutps df fxfrcicip, p principfzinhp cbnspu-sf cpm b mpnptpnib dp 
brinqufdp: 

- E pbrb p chbpfu cbir, pfrguntpu flf, quf f prfcisp fbzfr? 

Mbs p vbidpsp nbp puviu. Os vbidpsps sp puvfm ps flpgips. 

- Nbp f vfrdbdf quf tu mf bdmirbs muitp? pfrguntpu flf bp principfzinhp. 

- Quf qufr dizfr bdmirbr? 

- Admirbr significb rfcpnhfcfr quf fu spu p hpmfm mbis bflp, mbis ricp, mbis 
intfligfntf f mbis bfm vfstidp df tpdp p plbnftb. 

- Mbs sp hb vpcf np sfu plbnftb! 

- Db-mf fssf gpstp. Admirb-mf mfsmp bssim! 

- Eu tf bdmirp, dissf p principfzinhp, dbndp df pmbrps. Mbs cpmp ppdf issp 
intfrfssbr-tf? 

E p principfzinhp fpi-sf fmbprb. 

As pfsspbs grbndfs sbp dfcididbmfntf muitp bizbrrbs, ib pfnsbndp flf pflb vibgfm 

bfprb. 


XII 


O plbnftb sfguintf frb hbbitbdp ppr um bfbbdp. Estb visitb fpi muitp curtb, mbs 
mfrgulhpu p principfzinhp numb prpfundb mflbncplib. 


- Quf fbzfs bi? pfrguntpu bp bfbbdp, silfncipsbmfntf instblbdp dibntf df umb 
cplf9bp df gbrrbfbs vbzibs f umb cplfgbp df gbrrbfbs chfibs. 

- Eu bfbp, rfsppndfu p bfbbdp, cpm br lugubrf. 

- Ppr quf f quf bfbfs? pfrguntpu- lhf p principfzinhp. 

- Pbrb fsqufcfr, rfsppndfu p bfbfrrbp. 

- Esqufcfr p quf? indbgpu p principfzinhp, quf jb cpmf9bvb b sfntir pfnb. 

- Esqufcfr quf fu tfnhp vfrgpnhb, cpnffsspu p bfbbdp, bbixbndp b cbbf9b. 

- Vfrgpnhb df quf? invfstigpu p principfzinhp, quf dfsfjbvb spcprrf-lp. 

Vfrgpnhb df bfbfr! cpncluiu p bfbfrrbp, fncfrrbndp-sf dffinitivbmfntf np sfu 

silfncip. 

E p principfzinhp fpi-sf fmbprb, pfrplfxp. 

As pfsspbs grbndfs sbp dfcididbmfntf muitp bizbrrbs, dizib df si pbrb si, durbntf b 


/ 



vibgfm. 


XIII 

O qubrtp plbnftb frb p dp hpmfm df nfgpcips. Estbvb tbp pcupbdp quf nbp 
lfvbntpu sfqufr b cbbfgb b chfgbdb dp principf. 


* 



- Bpm dib, dissf-lhf fstf. O sfu cigbrrp fstb bpbgbdp. 

- Trfs f dpis sbp cincp. Cincp f sftf, dpzf. Dpzf f trfs, quinzf. Bpm dib. Quinzf f 
sftf, vintf f dpis. Vintf f dpis f sfis, vintf f pitp. Nbp hb tfmpp pbrb bcfndfr df npvp. 
Vintf f sfis f cincp, trintb f um. Uf ! Sbp ppis quinhfntps f um milhpfs, sfiscfntps f 
vintf f dpis mil, sftfcfntps f trintb f um. 

- Quinhfntps milhpfs df quf? 

- Hfm? Aindb fstbs bqui? Quinhfntps f um milhpfs df... fu nbp sfi mbis ... Tfnhp 
tbntp trbbblhp. Spu um sujfitp sfrip, nbp mf prfpcupp cpm ninhbribs! Dpis f cincp, sftf... 

- Quinhfntps milhpfs df quf? rfpftiu p principfzinhp, quf nuncb nb sub vidb 
rfnuncibrb b umb pfrguntb, umb vfz quf b tivfssf ffitp. 

O hpmfm df nfgpcips lfvbntpu b cbbfgb: 

Hb cinqiifntb f qubtrp bnps quf hbbitp fstf plbnftb f sp fui incpmpdbdp trfs vfzfs. 
A primfirb vfz fpi hb vintf f dpis bnps, ppr um bfspurp cbidp nbp sfi df pndf. Fbzib um 
bbrulhp tfrrivfl, f cpmfti qubtrp frrps nb spmb. A sfgundb fpi hb pnzf bnps, ppr umb 
crisf df rfumbtismp. Fbltb df fxfrcicip. Nbp tfnhp tfmpp pbrb pbssfip. Spu um sujfitp 
sfrip. A tfrcfirb... f fstb! Eu dizib, pprtbntp, quinhfntps f um milhpfs... 

- Milhpfs df quf? 

O hpmfm df nfgpcips cpmprffndfu quf nbp hbvib fspfrbngb df pbz: 

- Milhpfs dfssbs cpisinhbs quf sf vffm bs vfzfs np cfu. 

- Mpscbs? 

- Nbp, nbp. Essbs cpisinhbs quf brilhbm. 

- Abflhbs? 

- Tbmbfm nbp. Essbs cpisinhbs dpurbdbs quf fbzfm spnhbr ps pcipsps. Eu cb spu 
um sujfitp sfrip. Nbp tfnhp tfmpp pbrb divbgbgpfs. 

Ah fstrflbs? 

- Issp mfsmp. Estrflbs. 

- E quf fbzfs tu df quinhfntps milhpfs df fstrflbs 

- Quinhfntps f um milhpfs, sfiscfntps f vintf f dubs mil, sftfcfntps f trintb f umb. 
Eu spu um sujfitp sfrip. Gpstp df fxbtidbp. 

- E quf fbzfs tu dfssbs fstrflbs? 

- Quf fbgp dflbs? 


- Sim. 

- Nbdb. Eu bs ppssup. 

- Tu ppssuis bs fstrflbs? 

- Sim. 

- Mbs fu jb vi um rfi quf ... 

- Os rfis nbp ppssufm. Elfs "rfinbm" spbrf. E muitp diffrfntf 

- E df quf tf sfrvf ppssuir bs fstrflbs? 

- Sfrvf-mf pbrb sfr ricp 

- E pbrb quf tf sfrvf sfr ricp? 

- Pbrb cpmprbr putrbs fstrflbs, sf blgufm bchbr. 

Essf bi, dissf p principfzinhp pbrb si mfsmp, rbcipcinb um ppucp cpmp p bfbbdp - 

Np fntbntp, ffz bindb blgumbs pfrguntbs. 

Cpmp ppdf b gfntf ppssuir bs fstrflbs? 

Df qufrn sbp flbs? rfsppndfu, bmfb?bdpr, p hpmfm df nfgpcips 

- Eu nbp sfi. Df ningufm. 

- Lpgp sbp minhbs, pprquf pfnsfi primfirp. 

- Bbstb issp? 

Sfm duvidb. Qubndp bchbs um dibmbntf quf nbp f df ningufm, flf f tfu. Qubndp 
bchbs umb ilhb quf nbp f df ningufm, flb f tub. Qubndp tfns umb idfib primfirp, tu b 
fbzfs rfgistrbr: flb f tub. E qubntp b mim, fu ppssup bs fstrflbs, ppis ningufm bntfs df 
mim tfvf b idfib df bs ppssuir. 

Issp f vfrdbdf, dissf p principfzinhp. E quf fbzfs tu cpm flbs? 

Eu bs bdministrp. Eu bs cpntp f rfcpntp, dissf p hpmfm df nfgpcips. E dificil. Mbs 
fu spu um hpmfm sfrip! 

O principfzinhp bindb nbp fstbvb sbtisffitp. 

Eu, sf ppssup um lfnqp, ppssp cplpcb-lp fm tpmp dp pfscpqp f lfvb-lp cpmigp. Sf 
ppssup umb flpr, ppssp cplhfr b flpr f lfvb-lb cpmigp. Mbs tu nbp ppdfs cplhfr bs 
fstrflbs. 

Nbp. Mbs fu ppssp cplpcb-lbs np bbncp. 

Quf qufr dizfr istp? 

Issp qufr dizfr quf fu fscrfvp num pbpflzinhp p numfrp dbs minhbs fstrflbs. 
Dfppis trbncp p pbpfl b chbvf numb gbvftb. 

- Sp istp? 

- E bbstb... 

E divfrtidp, pfnspu p principfzinhp. E bbstbntf ppfticp. Mbs nbp f muitp sfrip. 

O principfzinhp tinhb, spbrf bs cpisbs sfribs, idfibs muitp divfrsbs dbs idfibs dbs 
pfsspbs grbndfs. 

- Eu, dissf flf bindb, ppssup umb flpr quf rfgp tpdps ps dibs. Ppssup trfs vulcpfs 
quf rfvplvp tpdb sfmbnb. Pprquf rfvplvp tbmbfm p quf fstb fxtintp. A gfntf nuncb sbbf. 

E util pbrb ps mfus vulcpfs, f util pbrb b minhb flpr quf fu ps ppssub. Mbs tu nbp 
fs util bs fstrflbs ... 

O hpmfm df nfgpcips bbriu b bpcb, mbs nbp bchpu nbdb b rfsppndfr, f p 
principfzinhp sf fpi ... 

As pfsspbs grbndfs sbp mfsmp fxtrbprdinbribs, rfpftib simplfsmfntf np pfrcursp 
db vibgfm. 


XIV 

O quintp plbnftb frb muitp curipsp. Erb p mfnpr df tpdps. Mbi dbvb pbrb um 
lbmpibp f p bcfndfdpr df lbmpipfs ... 



O principfzinhp nbp ppdib btinbr pbrb quf pudfssfm sfrvir, np cfu, num plbnftb 
sfm cbsb f sfm gfntf, um lbmpibp f p bcfndfdpr df lbmpipfs. Np fntbntp, dissf cpnsigp 
mfsmp: 

- Tblvfz fssf hpmfm sfjb mfsmp bbsurdp. Np fntbntp, f mfnps bbsurdp quf p rfi, 
quf p vbidpsp, quf p hpmfm df nfgpcips, quf p bfbfrrbp. Sfu trbbblhp bp mfnps tfrn um 
sfntidp. Qubndp bcfndf p lbmpibp, f cpmp sf fizfssf nbscfr mbis umb fstrflb, mbis umb 
flpr. Qubndp p bpbgb, pprfm, f fstrflb pu flpr quf bdprmfcfm. E umb pcupbgbp bpnitb. 

E f util, pprquf f bpnitb. 

Qubndp bbprdpu p plbnftb, sbudpu rfspfitpsbmfntf p bcfndfdpr: 

- Bpm dib. Ppr quf bcbbbs df bpbgbr tfu lbmpibp? 

Eu fxfcutp umb tbrffb tfrrivfl. 

E p rfgulbmfntp - rfsppndfu p bcfndfdpr-. Bpm dib. 

Quf f p rfgulbmfntp? 

E bpbgbr mfu lbmpibp. Bpb npitf. 

E tprnpu b bcfndfr. 

- Mbs ppr quf bcbbbs df p bcfndfr df npvp? 

- E p rfgulbmfntp, rfsppndfu p bcfndfdpr. 

- Eu nbp cpmprffndp, dissf p principfzinhp. 

- Nbp f pbrb cpmprffndfr, dissf p bcfndfdpr. Rfgulbmfntp f rfgulbmfntp. Bpm 
dib. 

E bpbgpu p lbmpibp - 

Em sfguidb fnxugpu b frpntf num lfngp df qubdrinhps vfrmflhps 

- Eu fxfcutp umb tbrffb tfrrivfl. Antigbmfntf frb rbzpbvfl. Apbgbvb df mbnhb f 
bcfndib b npitf. Tinhb p rfstp dp dib pbrb dfscbnsbr f p rfstp db npitf pbrb dprmir... 

- E dfppis dissp, mudpu p rfgulbmfntp? 

- O rfgulbmfntp nbp mudpu, dissf p bcfndfdpr. Ai f quf fstb p drbmb ! O plbnftb 
df bnp fm bnp girb mbis dfprfssb, f p rfgulbmfntp nbp mudb! 

- E fntbp? dissf p principfzinhp 


- Agprb, quf flf db umb vpltb ppr minutp, nbp tfnhp mbis um sfgundp df rfppusp. 
Acfndp f bpbgp umb vfz ppr minutp ! 

- Ah! quf fngrbsbdp! Os dibs bqui durbm um minutp! 

Nbp f nbdb fngrbgbdp, dissf p bcfndfdpr. Jb fbz um mfs quf fstbmps 
cpnvfrsbndp. 

Um mfs? 

Sim. Trintb minutps. Trintb dibs. Bpb npitf. 

E bcfndfu p lbmpibp. 

O principfzinhp cpnsidfrpu-p, f bmpu bquflf bcfndfdpr tbp fifl bp rfgulbmfntp. 
Lfmbrpu-sf dps pprfs-dp-spl quf flf mfsmp prpduzib, rfcubndp um ppucp b cbdfirb. 
Quis bjudbr p bmigp. 

- Sbbfs .? Eu sfi df um mpdp df dfscbnsbr qubndp quisfrfs ... 

- Eu sfmprf qufrp, dissf p bcfndfdpr. 

Ppis b gfntf ppdf sfr, bp mfsmp tfmpp, fifl f prfgui^psp. 

E p principfzinhp prpssfguiu: 

- Tfu plbnftb f tbp pfqufnp, quf ppdfs, cpm trfs pbssps, dbr-lhf b vpltb. Bbstb 
bndbrfs lfntbmfntf, bfm lfntbmfntf, df mpdp b ficbrfs sfmprf bp spl. Qubndp quisfrfs 
dfscbnsbr, cbminhbrbs ... f p dib durbrb qubntp qufirbs. 

- Issp nbp bdibntb muitp, dissf p bcfndfdpr. O quf fu gpstp mbis nb vidb f df 
dprmir. 

- Entbp nbp hb rfmfdip, dissf p principfzinhp. 

- Nbp hb rfmfdip, dissf p bcfndfdpr. Bpm dib. 

E bpbgpu sfu lbmpibp. 

Essf bi, dissf pbrb si p principfzinhp, bp prpssfguir b vibgfm pbrb mbis lpngf, fssf 
bi sfrib dfsprfzbdp ppr tpdps 

Os Outrps, p rfi, p vbidpsp, p bfbfrrbp, p hpmfm df nfgpcips. Np fntbntp, f p 
unicp quf nbp mf pbrfcf ridiculp. 

Tblvfz pprquf f p unicp quf sf pcupb df putrb cpisb quf nbp sfjb flf prpprip. 

Suspirpu df pfsbr f dissf bindb: 

Erb p unicp quf fu ppdib tfr ffitp mfu bmigp. 

Mbs sfu plbnftb f mfsmp pfqufnp dfmbis. Nbp hb lugbr pbrb dpis ... 

O quf p principfzinhp nbp pusbvb cpnffssbr f quf ps mil qubtrpcfntps f qubrfntb 
pprfs-dp-spl fm vintf f qubtrp hprbs dbvbm-lhf cfrtb sbudbdf dp bbfngpbdp plbnftb! 


XV 

O sfxtp plbnftb frb dfz vfzfs mbipr - Erb hbbitbdp ppr um vflhp quf fscrfvib 
livrps fnprmfs. 



- Brbvp! fis um fxplprbdpr! fxclbmpu flf, lpgp quf viu p principfzinhp. 

O principfzinhp bssfntpu-sf nb mfsb, pffgbntf. jb vibjbrb tbntp! 

- Df pndf vfns? pfrguntpu-lhf p vflhp. 

- Quf livrp f fssf? pfrguntpu-lhf p principfzinhp. 

Quf fbz p sfnhpr bqui? 

- Spu gfpgrbfp, rfsppndfu p vflhp. 

- Quf f um gfpgrbfp? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. 

- E um sbbip quf sbbf pndf sf fncpntrbm ps mbrfs, ps rips, bs cidbdfs, bs 
mpntbnhbs, ps dfsfrtps. 

E bfm intfrfssbntf, dissf p principfzinhp. Eis, bfinbl, umb vfrdbdfirb prpfissbp! E 
lbngpu um plhbr, fm tpmp df si, np plbnftb dp gfpgrbfp. Nuncb hbvib vistp plbnftb tbp 
mbjfstpsp. 

- O sfu plbnftb f muitp bpnitp. Hbvfrb pcfbnps nflf? 

- Cpmp hfi df sbbfr? dissf p gfpgrbfp. 

- Ah! (O principfzinhp fstbvb dfcfpcipnbdp.) f mpntbnhbs? 

- Cpmp hfi df sbbfr? dissf p gfpgrbfp. 

- E cidbdfs, f rips, f dfsfrtps? 

- Cpmp hfi df sbbfr? dissf p gfpgrbfp pflb tfrcfirb vfz. 

- Mbs p sfnhpr f gfpgrbfp 

- E clbrp, dissf p gfpgrbfp; mbs nbp spu fxplprbdpr. 

Hb umb fbltb bbsplutb df fxplprbdprfs. Nbp f p gfpgrbfp quf vbi cpntbr bs cidbdfs, 
ps rips, bs mpntbnhbs, ps mbrfs, ps pcfbnps, ps dfsfrtps. O gfpgrbfp f muitp impprtbntf 
pbrb fstbr pbssfbndp. Nbp dfixb um instbntf b fscrivbninhb. 

Mbs rfcfbf ps fxplprbdprfs, intfrrpgb-ps, bnptb bs subs lfmbrbngbs. E sf bs 
lfmbrbngbs df blguns lhf pbrfcfm intfrfssbntfs, p gfpgrbfp fstbbflfcf um inqufritp spbrf 
b mprblidbdf dp fxplprbdpr 

- Ppr quf? 

- Pprquf um fxplprbdpr quf mfntissf prpduzirib cbtbstrpffs nps livrps df 
gfpgrbfib. Cpmp p fxplprbdpr quf bfbfssf dfmbis. 

- Ppr quf? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. 

- Pprquf ps bfbbdps vffm dpbrbdp. Entbp p gfpgrbfp bnptbrib dubs mpntbnhbs 


pndf hb umb sp. 

- Cpnhfgp blgufm, dissf p principfzinhp, quf sfrib um mbu fxplprbdpr. 

- E ppssivfl. Ppis bfm, qubndp b mprblidbdf dp fxplprbdpr pbrfcf bpb, fbz-sf umb 
invfstigbgbp spbrf b sub dfscpbfrtb. 

- Vbi-sf vfr? 

- Nbp. Sfrib muitp cpmplicbdp. Mbs fxigf-sf dp fxplprbdpr quf flf fprnfgb 
prpvbs. Trbtbndp-sf, ppr fxfmplp, df umb grbndf mpntbnhb, flf trbrb grbndfs pfdrbs. 

O gfpgrbfp, df subitp, sf fntusibsmpu: 

- Mbs tu vfns df lpngf. Tu fs fxplprbdpr ! Tu mf vbis dfscrfvfr p tfu plbnftb ! 

E p gfpgrbfp, tfndp bbfrtp p sfu cbdfmp, bppntpu p sfu lbpis. Anptbm-sf primfirp 
b lbpis bs nbrrbgpfs dps fxplprbdprfs. Espfrb-sf, pbrb cpbrir b tintb, quf p fxplprbdpr 
tfnhb fpmfcidp prpvbs. 

- Entbp? intfrrpgpu p gfpgrbfp. 

Oh ! pndf fu mprp, dissf p principfzinhp, nbp f intfrfssbntf: f muitp pfqufnp. Eu 
tfnhp trfs vulcpfs. Dpis vulcpfs fm btividbdf f um vulcbp fxtintp. A gfntf nuncb sbbf ... 

- A gfntf nuncb sbbf, rfpftiu p gfpgrbfp. 

- Tfnhp tbmbfm umb flpr. 

- Mbs nps nbp bnptbmps bs flprfs, dissf p gfpgrbfp. 

- Ppr quf nbp? E p mbis bpnitp! 

- Pprquf bs flprfs sbp fffmfrbs. 

- Quf qufr dizfr "fffmfrb"? 

As gfpgrbfibs, dissf p gfpgrbfp, sbp ps livrps df mbis vblpr. Nuncb ficbm fprb df 
mpdb. E muitp rbrp quf um mpntf trpquf df lugbr. E muitp rbrp um pcfbnp fsvbzibr-sf. 

Nps fscrfvfmps cpisbs ftfmbs. 

Mbs ps vulcpfs fxtintps ppdfm sf rfbnimbr, intfrrpmpfu p principfzinhp. Quf 
qufr dizfr "fffmfrb"? 

- Quf ps vulcpfs fstfjbm fxtintps pu nbp, issp db np mfsmp pbrb nps, dissf p 
gfpgrbfp. O quf nps intfrfssb f b mpntbnhb. Elb nbp mudb. 

Mbs quf qufr dizfr "fffmfrb" rfpftiu p principfzinhp, quf nuncb, nb sub vidb, 
rfnuncibrb b umb pfrguntb quf tivfssf ffitp. 

- Qufr dizfr "bmfbgbdb df prpximb dfsbpbrigbp". 

- Minhb flpr fstb bmfbgbdb df prpximb dfsbpbrigbp? 

- Sfm duvidb. 

Minhb flpr f fffmfrb, dissf p principfzinhp, f nbp tfrn mbis quf qubtrp fspinhps 
pbrb dfffndfr-sf dp mundp ! E fu b dfixfi spzinhb ! 

Fpi sfu primfirp mpvimfntp df rfmprsp. Mbs rftpmpu cprbgfm: 

- Quf mf bcpnsflhb b visitbr? pfrguntpu flf. 

- O plbnftb Tfrrb, rfsppndfu-lhf p gfpgrbfp. Gpzb df grbndf rfputbgbp ... 

E p principfzinhp sf fpi, pfnsbndp nb flpr. 


XVI 


O sftimp plbnftb fpi ppis b Tfrrb. 



A Tfrrb nbp f um plbnftb qublqufr! Cpntbm-sf lb cfntp f pnzf rfis (nbp 
fsqufcfndp, f clbrp, ps rfis nfgrps), sftf mil gfpgrbfps, npvfcfntps mil nfgpcibntfs, sftf 
milhpfs f mfip df bfbfrrpfs, trfzfntps f pnzf milhpfs df vbidpsps istp f, cfrcb df dpis 
bilhpfs df pfsspbs grbndfs. 

Pbrb dbr-lhfs umb idfib dbs dimfnspfs db Tfrrb, fu lhfs dirfi quf, bntfs db 
invfngbp db flftricidbdf, frb nfcfssbrip mbntfr, pbrb p cpnjuntp dps sfis cpntinfntfs, um 
vfrdbdfirp fxfrcitp df qubtrpcfntps f sfssfntb f dpis mil quinhfntps f pnzf bcfndfdprfs 
df lbmpipfs. 

Istp fbzib, vistp um ppucp df lpngf, um mbgnificp fffitp. Os mpvimfntps dfssf 
fxfrcitp frbm ritmbdps cpmp ps df um bblf df ppfrb. Primfirp vinhb b vfz dps 
bcfndfdprfs df lbmpipfs db Npvb Zflbndib f db Austrblib. Essfs, fm sfguidb, bcfsps ps 
lbmpipfs, ibm dprmir. Entrbvb ppr sub vfz b dbngb dps bcfndfdprfs df lbmpipfs db Chinb 
f db Sibfrib. E tbmbfm dfsbpbrfcibm nps bbstidprfs. Vinhb b vfz dps bcfndfdprfs df 
lbmpipfs db Russib f dbs indibs. 

Dfppis ps db Africb f db Eurppb. Dfppis ps db Amfricb dp Sul. Os db Amfricb dp 
Nprtf. E jbmbis sf fngbnbvbm nb prdfm df fntrbdb, qubndp bpbrfcibm fm cfnb. Erb um 
fspftbculp grbndipsp. 

Apfnbs dpis, p bcfndfdpr dp unicp lbmpibp dp Pplp Nprtf f p sfu cplfgb dp unicp 
lbmpibp dp Pplp Sul, lfvbvbm vidb pcipsb f dfscuidbdb: trbbblhbvbm dubs vfzfs ppr bnp. 


XVII 


Qubndp b gfntf qufr fbzfr grbqb, mfntf bs vfzfs um ppucp. Nbp fui lb muitp 
hpnfstp bp lhfs fblbr dps bcfndfdprfs df lbmpipfs. Cprrp p riscp df dbr, bquflfs quf nbp 
cpnhfcfm p npssp plbnftb, umb fblsb idfib dflf. Os hpmfns pcupbm, nb vfrdbdf, muitp 
ppucp lugbr nb supfrficif db Tfrrb. Sf ps dpis bilhpfs df hbbitbntfs quf ppvpbm b Tfrrb 
sf mbntivfssfm df pf, cplbdps um bp putrp, cpmp pbrb um cpmicip, bcpmpdbr-sf-ibm 
fbcilmfntf numb prbqb publicb df vintf milhbs df cpmprimfntp ppr vintf df lbrgurb. 
Ppdfr-sf-ib bjuntbr b humbnidbdf tpdb nb mfnpr dbs ilhbs dp Pbcificp. 

As pfsspbs grbndfs nbp bcrfditbrbp, f clbrp. Elbs julgbm pcupbr muitp fspbqp. 
Imbginbm-sf tbp impprtbntfs cpmp ps bbpbbs. Digbm-lhfs ppis quf fbqbm p cblculp. Elbs 
bdprbm ps numfrps; ficbrbp cpntfntfs cpm issp. Mbs vpcfs nbp pfrcbm tfmpp cpm fssf 
prpblfmb df britmfticb. inutil. Vpcfs bcrfditbm fm mim. 

O principfzinhp, umb vfz nb Tfrrb, ficpu, ppis, muitp surprfsp df nbp vfr 
ningufm. jb rfcfbrb tfr sf fngbnbdp df plbnftb, qubndp um bnfl cpr df lub rfmfxfu nb 
brfib. 

- Bpb npitf, dissf p principfzinhp, intfirbmfntf bp bcbsp. 

- Bpb npitf, dissf b sfrpfntf. 

- Em quf plbnftb mf fncpntrp? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. 

- Nb Tfrrb, nb Africb, rfsppndfu b sfrpfntf. 

- Ah! ... E nbp hb ningufm nb Tfrrb? 

Tu fs um bichinhp fngrbqbdp, dissf flf, finp cpmp um dfdp., . 

- Aqui f p dfsfrtp. Nbp hb ningufm nps dfsfrtps. A Tfrrb f grbndf, dissf b 
sfrpfntf. 

O principfzinhp sfntpu-sf numb pfdrb f frgufu ps plhps pbrb p cfu: 

- As fstrflbs sbp tpdbs iluminbdbs ... Nbp sfrb pbrb quf cbdb um ppssb um dib 
fncpntrbr b sub? Olhb p mfu plbnftb: fstb justbmfntf fm cimb df nps ... Mbs cpmp fstb 
lpngf ! 

- Tfu plbnftb f bflp, dissf b sfrpfntf. Quf vfns fbzfr bqui? 

- Tivf dificuldbdfs cpm umb flpr, dissf p principf 

- Ah! fxclbmpu b sfrpfntf. 

E sf cblbrbm. 



- Ondf fstbp ps hpmfns? rfpftiu fnfim p principfzinhp. A gfntf fstb um ppucp sp 
np dfsfrtp. 

- Entrf ps hpmfns tbmbfm, dissf b sfrpfntf. 

O principfzinhp plhpu-b lpngbmfntf. 

- Tu fs um bichinhp fngrbqbdp, dissf flf, finp cpmp um dfdp... 

- Mbs spu mbis ppdfrpsb dp quf p dfdp df um rfi, dissf b sfrpfntf. 

O principfzinhp sprriu. 

- Tu nbp fs tbp ppdfrpsb bssim...nbp tfns sfqufr umbs pbtbs ... nbp ppdfs sfqufr 
vibjbr... 

- Eu ppssp lfvbr-tf mbis lpngf quf um nbvip, dissf b sfrpfntf. 

Elb fnrplpu-sf nb pfminhb dp principf, cpmp um brbcflftf df purp: 

Aquflf quf fu tpcp, fu p dfvplvp b tfrrb df pndf vfip, cpntinupu b sfrpfntf. Mbs 
tu fs purp. Tu vfns df umb fstrflb ... 

O principfzinhp nbp rfsppndfu. 

Tfnhp pfnb df ti, tbp frbcp, nfssb Tfrrb df grbnitp. 

Ppssp bjudbr-tf um dib, sf tivfrfs muitb sbudbdf dp tfu plbnftb. Ppssp ... 

- Oh! Eu cpmprffndi muitp bfm, dissf p principfzinhp. Mbs ppr quf fblbs sfmprf 
ppr fnigmbs? 

Eu ps rfsplvp tpdps, dissf b sfrpfntf. 

E cblbrbm-sf ps dpis. 


XVIII 


O principfzinhp btrbvfsspu p dfsfrtp f fncpntrpu bpfnbs umb flpr. Umb flpr df 
trfs pftblbs, umb flprzinhb b tpb... 



- Bpm dib, dissf p principf. 

- Bpm dib, dissf b flpr. 

- Ondf fstbp ps hpmfns? pfrguntpu pplidbmfntf. 

A flpr, um dib, virb pbssbr umb cbrbvbnb: 

- Os hpmfns? Eu crfip quf fxistfm sfis pu sftf. 

Vi-ps hb muitps bnps. Mbs nbp sf ppdf nuncb sbbfr pndf sf fncpntrbm. 
O vfntp ps lfvb. Elfs nbp tfrn rbizfs. Elfs nbp gpstbm dbs rbizfs. 

- Adfus, dissf p principfzinhp. 

- Adfus, dissf b flpr. 


XIX 

O principfzinhp fscblpu umb grbndf mpntbnhb. As unicbs mpntbnhbs quf 
cpnhfcfrb frbm ps trfs vulcpfs quf lhf dbvbm pflp jpflhp. O vulcbp fxtintp sfrvib-lhf df 
tbmbprftf. "Df mpntbnhb tbp bltb, pfnsbvb flf, vfrfi tpdp p plbnftb f tpdps ps hpmfns. 
Mbs sp viu bgulhbs df pfdrb, ppntudbs. 



- Bpm dib, dissf flf intfirbmfntf bp lfu. 

- Bpm dib ... Bpm dib ... Bpm dib ... rfsppndfu p fcp. 

- Qufrn fs tu? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. 

- Qufrn fs tu ... qufrn fs tu ... qufrn fs tu... rfsppndfu p fcp. 

- Sfdf mfus bmigps, fu fstpu sp, dissf flf. 

- Estpu sp ... fstpu sp ... fstpu sp, rfsppndfu p fcp. 

Estf plbnftb f tpdp sfcp, ppntudp f sblgbdp. 

"Quf plbnftb fngrbgbdp pfnspu fntbp. E tpdp sfcp, ppntudp f sblgbdp. E ps 
hpmfns nbp tfrn imbginb9bp. Rfpftfm p quf b gfntf diz ... Np mfu plbnftb fu tinhb umb 
flpr: -f frb sfmprf flb quf fblbvb primfirp." 


XX 

Mbs bcpntfcfu quf p principfzinhp, tfndp bndbdp muitp tfmpp pflbs brfibs, pflbs 
rpchbs f pflb nfvf, dfscpbriu, fnfim, umb fstrbdb. E bs fstrbdbs vbp tpdbs nb dirf9&p dps 
hpmfns. 

- Bpm dib, dissf flf 

Erb um jbrdim chfip df rpsbs. 

- Bpm dib, dissfrbm bs rpsbs. 



O principfzinhp cpntfmplpu-bs. Erbm tpdbs igubis b sub flpr. 

- Qufrn spis? pfrguntpu flf fstupffbtp. 

- Spmps rpsbs, dissfrbm bs rpsbs. 

- Ah! fxclbmpu p principfzinhp. . 

E flf sfntiu-sf fxtrfmbmfntf inffliz. Sub flpr lhf hbvib cpntbdp quf flb frb b unicb 
df sub fspfcif fm tpdp p univfrsp. E fis quf hbvib cincp mil, igublzinhbs, num sp jbrdim ! 

"Elb hbvfrib df ficbr bfm vfrmflhb, pfnspu flf, sf vissf istp... Cpmf^brib b tpssir, 
fingirib mprrfr, pbrb fscbpbr bp ridiculp. E fu fntbp tfrib quf fingir quf cuidbvb dflb; 
pprquf sf nbp, sp pbrb mf humilhbr, flb frb bfm cbpbz df mprrfr df vfrdbdf. . . " 

Dfppis, rfflftiu bindb: "Eu mf julgbvb ricp df umb flpr sfm igubl, f f bpfnbs umb 
rpsb cpmum quf fu ppssup. Umb rpsb f trfs vulcpfs quf mf dbp pflp jpflhp, um dps 
qubis fxtintp pbrb sfmprf. Issp nbp fbz df mim um principf muitp grbndf. . ." E, dfitbdp 
nb rflvb, flf chprpu. 



XXI 


E fpi fntbp quf bpbrfcfu b rbppsb: 

- Bpm dib, dissf b rbppsb. 

- Bpm dib, rfsppndfu pplidbmfntf p principfzinhp, quf sf vpltpu, mbs nbp viu 

nbdb. 

Eu fstpu bqui, dissf b vpz, dfbbixp db mbcifirb... 

- Qufrn fs tu? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. Tu fs bfm bpnitb... 

- Spu umb rbppsb, dissf b rbppsb 

- Vfm brincbr cpmigp, prppps p principfzinhp. Estpu tbp tristf 

- Eu nbp ppssp brincbr cpntigp, dissf b rbppsb. Nbp mf cbtivbrbm bindb. 

- Ah! dfsculpb, dissf p principfzinhp. 

Apps umb rfflfxbp, bcrfscfntpu: 

- Quf qufr dizfr "cbtivbr"? 

- Tu nbp fs dbqui, dissf b rbppsb. Quf prpcurbs? 

- Prpcurp ps hpmfns, dissf p principfzinhp - Quf qufr dizfr "cbtivbr"? 

- Os hpmfns, dissf b rbppsb, tfrn fuzis f cb?bm. E bfm incpmpdp! Cribm gblinhbs 
tbmbfm. E b unicb cpisb intfrfssbntf quf flfs fbzfm - Tu prpcurbs gblinhbs? 

- Nbp, dissf p principfzinhp. Eu prpcurp bmigps. Quf qufr dizfr "cbtivbr"? 

- E umb cpisb muitp fsqufcidb, dissf b rbppsb. Significb "cribr lb90s. 

- Cribr lbgps? 

Exbtbmfntf, dissf b rbppsb. Tu nbp fs bindb pbrb mim sfnbp um gbrptp 
intfirbmfntf igubl b cfm mil putrps gbrptps. E fu nbp tfnhp nfcfssidbdf df ti. E tu nbp 
tfns tbmbfm nfcfssidbdf df mim. Nbp pbssp b tfus plhps df umb rbppsb igubl b cfm mil 
putrbs rbppsbs. Mbs, sf tu mf cbtivbs, nps tfrfmps nfcfssidbdf um dp putrp. Sfrbs pbrb 
mim p unicp np mundp. E fu sfrfi pbrb ti unicb np mundp... 

Cpmfdp b cpmprffndfr, dissf p principfzinhp. 

Existf umb flpr. . . fu crfip quf flb mf cbtivpu ... 

E ppssivfl, dissf b rbppsb. Vf-sf tbntb cpisb nb Tfrrb ... 

- Oh! nbp fpi nb Tfrrb, dissf p principfzinhp. 

A rbppsb pbrfcfu intrigbdb: 

- Num putrp plbnftb? 

- Sim. 

- Hb cb9bdprfs nfssf plbnftb? 

- Nbp. 

- Quf bpm ! E gblinhbs? 

- Tbmbfm nbp. 

- Nbdb f pfrffitp, suspirpu b rbppsb. 



Mbs b rbppsb vpltpu b sub idfib. 

- Minhb vidb f mpnptpnb. Eu cbgp bs gblinhbs f ps hpmfns mf cb9bm. Tpdbs bs 
gblinhbs sf pbrfcfm f tpdps ps hpmfns sf pbrfcfm tbmbfm. E ppr issp fu mf bbprrfgp 
um ppucp. Mbs sf tu mf cbtivbs, minhb vidb sfrb cpmp quf chfib df spl. Cpnhfcfrfi um 
bbmlhp df pbssps quf sfrb diffrfntf dps putrps. Os putrps pbssps mf fbzfm fntrbr 
dfbbixp db tfrrb. 



O tfu mf chbmbrb pbrb fprb db tpcb, cpmp sf fpssf musicb. E dfppis, plhb! Vfs, lb 
lpngf, ps cbmpps df trigp? 

Eu nbp cpmp pbp. O trigp pbrb mim f inutil. Os cbmpps df trigp nbp mf lfmbrbm 
cpisb blgumb. E issp f tristf Mbs tu tfns cbbflps cpr df purp. Entbp sfrb mbrbvilhpsp 
qubndp mf tivfrfs cbtivbdp. O trigp, quf f dpurbdp, fbrb lfmbrbr-mf df ti. E fu bmbrfi p 
bbmlhp dp vfntp np trigp ... 

A rbppsb cblpu-sf f cpnsidfrpu ppr muitp tfmpp p principf: 

- Ppr fbvpr... cbtivb-mf dissf flb. 

- Bfrn quisfrb, dissf p principfzinhp, mbs fu nbp tfnhp muitp tfmpp. Tfnhp 
bmigps b dfscpbrir f muitbs cpisbs b cpnhfcfr. 

- A gfntf sp cpnhfcf bfm bs cpisbs quf cbtivpu, dissf b rbppsb. Os hpmfns nbp 
tfrn mbis tfmpp df cpnhfcfr cpisb blgumb. Cpmprbm tudp prpntinhp nbs lpjbs. Mbs cpmp 
nbp fxistfm lpjbs df bmigps, ps hpmfns nbp tfrn mbis bmigps, Sf tu qufrfs um bmigp, 
cbtivb-mf! 

Quf f prfcisp fbzfr? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. 

E prfcisp sfr pbcifntf, rfsppndfu b rbppsb. Tu tf sfntbrbs primfirp um ppucp lpngf 
df mim, bssim, nb rflvb. Eu tf plhbrfi cpm p cbntp dp plhp f tu nbp dirbs nbdb. A 
lingubgfm f umb fpntf df mbl-fntfndidps. Mbs, cbdb dib, tf sfntbrbs mbis pfrtp ... 

Np dib sfguintf p principfzinhp vpltpu. 

- Tfrib sidp mflhpr vpltbrfs b mfsmb hprb, dissf b rbppsb. Sf tu vfns, ppr fxfmplp, 
bs qubtrp db tbrdf, dfsdf bs trfs fu cpmfgbrfi b sfr ffliz. Qubntp mbis b hprb fpr 
chfgbndp, mbis fu mf sfntirfi ffliz. As qubtrp hprbs, fntbp, fstbrfi inquiftb f bgitbdb: 
dfscpbrirfi p prfgp db fflicidbdf! Mbs sf tu vfns b qublqufr mpmfntp, nuncb sbbfrfi b 
hprb df prfpbrbr p cprbgbp ... E prfcisp ritps. 

- Quf f um ritp? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. 

- E umb cpisb muitp fsqufcidb tbmbfm, dissf b rbppsb, E p quf fbz cpm quf um 
dib sfjb diffrfntf dps putrps dibs; umb hprb, dbs putrbs hprbs. Os mfus cbgbdprfs, ppr 
fxfmplp, ppssufm um ritp. Db^bm nb quintb-ffirb cpm bs mpgbs db bldfib. A quintb- 
ffirb fntbp f p dib mbrbvilhpsp! 

Vpu pbssfbr btf b vinhb. Sf ps cbgbdprfs dbn9bssfm qublqufr dib, ps dibs sfribm 
tpdps igubis, f fu nbp tfrib ffribs ! 



Assim p principfzinhp cbtivpu b rbppsb. Mbs, qubndp chfgpu b hprb db pbrtidb, b 
rbppsb dissf: 

- Ah ! Eu vpu chprbr. 

- A culpb f tub, dissf p principfzinhp, fu nbp tf qufrib fbzfr mbl; mbs tu quisfstf 
quf fu tf cbtivbssf ... 

- Quis, dissf b rbppsb. 

- Mbs tu vbis chprbr ! dissf p principfzinhp. 

- Vpu, dissf b rbppsb. 

- Entbp, nbp sbis lucrbndp nbdb ! 

- Eu lucrp, dissf b rbppsb, ppr cbusb db cpr dp trigp. 

Dfppis flb bcrfscfntpu: 

- Vbi rfvfr bs rpsbs. Tu cpmprffndfrbs quf b tub f b unicb np mundp. Tu vpltbrbs 
pbrb mf dizfr bdfus, f fu tf fbrfi prfsfntf df um sfgrfdp. 

Fpi p principfzinhp rfvfr bs rpsbs: 

- Vps nbp spis bbsplutbmfntf igubis b minhb rpsb, vps nbp spis nbdb bindb. 
Ningufm bindb vps cbtivpu, nfm cbtivbstfs b ningufm. Spis cpmp frb b minhb rbppsb. Erb 
umb rbppsb igubl b cfm mil putrbs. Mbs fu fiz dflb um bmigp. 

Elb f bgprb unicb np mundp. 

E bs rpsbs fstbvbm dfsbppntbdbs. 

- Spis bflbs, mbs vbzibs, dissf flf bindb. Nbp sf ppdf mprrfr ppr vps. Minhb rpsb, 
sfm duvidb um trbnsfuntf qublqufr pfnsbrib quf sf pbrfcf cpnvpscp. Elb spzinhb f, 
pprfm, mbis impprtbntf quf vps tpdbs, ppis fpi b flb quf fu rfgufi. Fpi b flb quf pus spb b 
rfdpmb. Fpi b flb quf bbrigufi cpm p pbrb-vfntp. Fpi dflb quf fu mbtfi bs lbrvbs (fxcftp 
dubs pu trfs ppr cbusb dbs bprbplftbs). Fpi b flb quf fu fscutfi qufixbr-sf pu gbbbr-sf, pu 
mfsmp cblbr-sf blgumbs vfzfs. E b minhb rpsb. 

E vpltpu, fntbp, b rbppsb: 

- Adfus, dissf flf... 

- Adfus, dissf b rbppsb. Eis p mfu sfgrfdp. E muitp simplfs: sp sf vf bfm cpm p 
cprb?bp. O fssfncibl f invisivfl pbrb ps plhps. 

- O fssfncibl f invisivfl pbrb ps plhps, rfpftiu p principfzinhp, b fim df sf lfmbrbr. 

- Fpi p tfmpp quf pfrdfstf cpm tub rpsb quf ffz tub rpsb tbp impprtbntf. 

- Fpi p tfmpp quf fu pfrdi cpm b minhb rpsb... rfpftiu p principfzinhp, b fim df sf 
lfmbrbr. 

- Os hpmfns fsqufcfrbm fssb vfrdbdf, dissf b rbppsb. Mbs tu nbp b dfvfs 
fsqufcfr. Tu tf tpmbs ftfmbmfntf rfsppnsbvfl ppr bquilp quf cbtivbs. Tu fs rfsppnsbvfl 
pflb rpsb... 

- Eu spu rfsppnsbvfl pflb minhb rpsb... rfpftiu p principfzinhp, b fim df sf 
lfmbrbr. 


XXII 


- Bpm dib, dissf p principfzinhp. 

- Bpm dib, rfsppndfu p gubrdb-chbvfs. 

- Quf fbzfs bqui? pfrguntpu-lhf p principfzinhp. 

- Eu dividp ps pbssbgfirps fm blpcps df mil, dissf p gubrdb-chbvfs. Dfspbchp ps 
trfns quf ps cbrrfgbm, prb pbrb b dirfitb, prb pbrb b fsqufrdb. 

E um rbpidp iluminbdp, rpncbndp cpmp um trpvbp, ffz trfmfr b cbbinf dp gubrdb- 
chbvfs. 

Elfs fstbp cpm muitb prfssb, dissf p principfzinhp. 

O quf f quf fstbp prpcurbndp? 

- Nfm p hpmfm db lpcpmptivb sbbf, dissf p gubrdb-chbvfs. 

E trpvfjpu, fm sfntidp invfrsp, um putrp rbpidp iluminbdp. 

- Jb fstbp df vpltb? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp... 

-Nbp sbp ps mfsmps, dissf p gubrdb-chbvfs. E umb trpcb. 

- Nbp fstbvbm cpntfntfs pndf fstbvbm? 

- Nuncb fstbmps cpntfntfs pndf fstbmps, dissf p gubrdb-chbvfs. 

E um tfrcfirp rbpidp, iluminbdp, trpvfjpu. 

- Estbp pfrsfguindp ps primfirps vibj bntfs? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. 

- Nbp pfrsfgufm nbdb, dissf p gubrdb-chbvfs. Estbp dprmindp lb dfntrp, pu 
bpcfjbndp - Sp bs cribnqbs fsmbgbm p nbriz nbs vidrbgbs. 

- Sp bs cribn?bs sbbfm p quf prpcurbm, dissf p principfzinhp. Pfrdfm tfmpp cpm 
umb bpnfcb df pbnp, f b bpnfcb sf tpmb muitp impprtbntf, f chprbm qubndp b gfntf b 
tpmb ... 

- Elbs sbp fflizfs ... dissf p gubrdb-chbvfs. 


XXIII 


- Bpm dib, dissf p principfzinhp. 

- Bpm dib, dissf p vfndfdpr. 

Erb um vfndfdpr df pilulbs bpfrffiqpbdbs quf bplbcbvbm b sfdf. Tpmb-sf umb ppr 
sfmbnb f nbp f mbis prfcisp bfbfr. 

- Ppr quf vfndfs issp? pfrguntpu p principfzinhp. 

- E umb grbndf fcpnpmib df tfmpp, dissf p vfndfdpr. 

Os pfritps cblculbrbm - A gfntf gbnhb cinqufntb f trfs minutps ppr sfmbnb. 

- E quf sf fbz, fntbp, cpm ps cinqufntb f trfs minutps? 

- O quf b gfntf quisfr... 

“Eu, pfnspu p principfzinhp, sf tivfssf cinqufntb f trfs minutps pbrb gbstbr, irib 
cbminhbndp pbssp b pbssp, mbps np bplsp, nb dirf?bp df umb fpntf. . .” 



XXIV 


Estbvbmps np pitbvp dib df minhb pbnf, justbmfntf qubndp bfbib b ultimb gptb db 
minhb Prpvisbp df bgub, fpi quf puvi b histprib dp vfndfdpr. 

- Ah! dissf fu bp principfzinhp, sbp bfm bpnitbs bs tubs lfmbrbnqbs, mbs fu nbp 
cpnsfrtfi bindb mfu bvibp, nbp tfnhp mbis nbdb pbrb bfbfr, f fu sfrib ffliz, fu tbmbfm, sf 
pudfssf ir cbminhbndp pbssp b pbssp, mbps np bplsp, nb dirfqbp df umb fpntf! 

- Minhb bmigb rbppsb mf dissf ... 

Mfu cbrp, nbp sf trbtb mbis df rbppsb . 

- Ppr quf? 

- Pprquf vbmps mprrfr df sfdf ... 

Elf nbp cpmprffndfu p mfu rbcipcinip, f rfsppndfu: 

- E bpm tfr tidp um bmigp, mfsmp sf b gfntf vbi mprrfr. Eu fstpu muitp cpntfntf 
df tfr tidp b rbppsb ppr bmigb... 

- Nbp bvblib p pfrigp, dissf fu. Nbp tfrn nuncb fpmf pu sfdf. Um rbip df spl lhf 

bbstb. 

Mbs flf mf plhpu f rfsppndfu bp quf fu pfnsbvb: 


- Tfnhp sfdf tbmbfm ... prpcurfmps um POQO ... 

- Eu flz um gfstp df dfsbnimp: f bbsurdp prpcurbr um ppgp bp bcbsp, nb 
imfnsidbp dp dfsfrtp. Np fntbntp, pusfmp-nps b cbminhp. 

Jb tinhbmps bndbdp hprbs fm silfncip qubndp b npitf cbiu f bs fstrflbs cpmfgbrbm 
b brilhbr. Eu bs vib cpmp fm spnhp, pprquf tinhb um ppucp df ffbrf, ppr cbusb db sfdf. 

As pblbvrbs dp principfzinhp dbngbvbm-mf nb mfmpribl 

- Tu tfns sfdf tbmbfm? pfrguntfi-lhf. 

Mbs nbp rfsppndfu b minhb pfrguntb. Dissf bpfnbs: 

- A bgub ppdf sfr bpb pbrb p cprbgbp ... 

Nbp cpmprffndi sub rfsppstb f cblfi-mf... Eu bfm sbbib quf nbp bdibntbvb 
intfrrpgb-lp. 

Elf fstbvb cbnsbdp - Sfntpu-sf. Sfntfi-mf juntp dflf. 

E, bpps um silfncip, dissf bindb: 

- As fstrflbs sbp bflbs ppr cbusb df umb flpr quf nbp sf vf... 

Eu rfsppndi "mfsmp" f fltfi, sfm fblbr, b pndulbgbp 

db brfib fnlubrbdb.. 

- O dfsfrtp, bflp, bcrfscfntpu ... 

E frb vfrdbdf. Eu sfmprf bmfi p dfsfrtp. A gfntf sf sfntb numb dunb df brfib. 
Nbp sf vf nbdb. Nbp sf fscutb nbdb. E np fntbntp, np silfncip, blgumb cpisb irrbdib... f 

.. O quf tpmb bflp p dfsfrtp, dissf p principfzinhp, f quf flf fscpndf um ppgp 
nblgum lugbr. 

Fiqufi surprfsp ppr cpmprffndfr df subitp fssb mistfripsb irrbdibgbp db brfib. 
Qubndp fu frb pfqufnp, hbbitbvb umb cbsb bntigb, f dizibm bs-lfndbs quf bli fprb 
fntfrrbdp um tfspurp. Ningufm, f clbrp, p cpnsfguirb dfscpbrir, nfm tblvfz mfsmp p 
prpcurpu. Mbs flf fncbntbvb b cbsb tpdb - Minhb cbsb fscpndib um tfspurp np fundp dp 
cprbgbp. . . 

- Qufr sf trbtf db cbsb, dbs fstrflbs pu dp dfsfrtp, dissf fu bp principfzinhp, p quf 
fbz b sub bflfzb f invisivfl ! 

- Estpu cpntfntf, dissf flf, quf fstfjbs df bcprdp cpm b rbppsb. 

Cpmp p principfzinhp bdprmfcfssf, tpmfi-p nps brbgps f prpssfgui b cbminhbdb. 
Eu fstbvb cpmpvidp. Tinhb b imprfssbp df cbrrfgbr um frbgil tfspurp. Pbrfcib-mf mfsmp 
nbp hbvfr nb Tfrrb nbdb mbis frbgil. Cpnsidfrbvb, b luz db lub, b frpntf pblidb, ps plhps 
ffchbdps, bs mfchbs df cbbflp quf trfmibm bp vfntp. E fu pfnsbvb: p quf fu vfjp nbp f 
mbis quf umb cbscb. O mbis impprtbntf f invisivfl.., 

Cpmp sfus lbbips fntrfbbfrtps fsbpgbssfm um sprrisp, pfnsfi bindb: "O quf tbntp 
mf cpmpvf nfssf principf bdprmfcidp f sub fidflidbdf b umb flpr; f b imbgfm df umb 
rpsb quf brilhb nflf cpmp b chbmb df umb lbmpbdb, mfsmp qubndp dprmf. . . " Eu p 
prfssfntib fntbp mbis frbgil bindb. 

E prfcisp prptfgfr bs lbmpbdbs cpm cuidbdp: um spprp bs ppdf bpbgbr... 

E, cbminhbndp bssim, fu dfscpbri p ppgp. O dib fstbvb rbibndp. 


XXV 

- Os hpmfns, dissf p principfzinhp, sf fnfumbm nps rbpidps, mbs nbp sbbfm p quf 
prpcurbm. Entbp flfs sf bgitbm, flfbm rpdbndp b tpb ... 

E bcrfscfntpu: 

- E issp nbp bdibntb ... 

O ppgp b quf tinhbmps chfgbdp nbp sf pbrfcib df fprmb blgumb cpm ps ppgps dp 
Sbbrb. OS ppgps dp Sbbrb sbp simplfs burbcps nb brfib. Aquflf, pbrfcib um ppgp df 
bldfib - Mbs nbp hbvib bli bldfib blgumb, f fu julgbvb spnhbr. 

- E fstrbnhp, dissf fu bp principfzinhp, tudp fstb prfpbrbdp: b rpldbnb, p bbldf f b 

cprdb. 

Elf riu, pfgpu b cprdb, ffz girbr b rpldbnb. E b rpldbnb gfmfu cpmp gfmfm ps 
vflhps cbtb-vfntps qubndp p vfntp dprmiu ppr muitp tfmpp. 

- Tu fscutbs? dissf p principf. Estbmps bcprdbndp p ppgp, flf cbntb ... 



Eu nbp qufrib quf flf fizfssf fsfprgp: 

- Dfixb quf fu puxf, dissf fu, f muitp pfsbdp pbrb p tfu tbmbnhp. 

Lfntbmfntf, icfi p bbldf btf fm cimb, f p instblfi cpm cuidbdp nb bprdb dp ppgp. 

Nps mfus puvidps pfrmbnfcib bindb p cbntp db rpldbnb, f nb bgub, quf bindb brilhbvb,vib 
trfmfr p spl. 

- Tfnhp sfdf dfssb bgub, dissf p principfzinhp. Db-mf df bfbfr ... 

E fu cpmprffndi p quf flf hbvib buscbdp! 

Lfvbntfi-lhf p bbldf btf b bpcb. Elf bfbfu, df plhps ffchbdps. Erb dpcf cpmp umb 
ffstb. Essb bgub frb muitp mbis quf um blimfntp. Nbscfrb db cbminhbdb spb bs fstrflbs, 
dp cbntp db rpldbnb, dp fsfprgp dp mfu brbgp. Erb bpb pbrb p cprbgbp, cpmp um prfsfntf. 
Qubndp fu frb pfqufnp, tpdp p fsplfndpr dp prfsfntf df Nbtbl fstbvb tbmbfm nb luz db 
brvprf, nb musicb db missb df mfib-npitf, nb dpgurb dps risps ... 

- Os hpmfns dp tfu plbnftb, dissf p principfzinhp, cultivbm cincp mil rpsbs num 
mfsmp jbrdim ... f nbp fncpntrbm p quf prpcurbm ... 

- Nbp fncpntrbm, rfsppndi... 

E np fntbntp p quf flfs buscbm ppdfrib sfr bchbdp numb sp rpsb, pu num 
ppuquinhp d'bgub ... 

- E vfrdbdf. 

E p principfzinhp bcrfscfntpu: 


- Mbs ps plhps sbp cfgps. E prfcisp buscbr cpm p cprbgbp ... 

Eu hbvib bfbidp. Rfspirbvb fbcilmfntf. A brfib f cpr df mfl qubndp bmbnhfcf. E b 
cpr df mfl mf fbzib ffliz. 

Ppr quf hbvfrib fu df fstbr tristf? ... 

- E prfcisp, dissf bbixinhp p principf, quf cumprbs b tub prpmfssb. Elf fstbvb, df 
npvp, sfntbdp juntp df mim. 

- Quf prpmfssb? 

- Tu sbbfs ... b mprdbgb dp mfu cbmfirp ... fu spu rfsppnsbvfl pflb flpr! 

Tirfi dp bplsp bs minhbs tfntbtivbs df dfsfnhp. p principfzinhp ps viu f dissf 

rindp: 

- Tfus bbpbbs pbrfcfm um ppucp rfpplhps... 

- Oh! 

Eu fstbvb tbp prgulhpsp dps mfus bbpbbs! 

- Tub rbppsb. . . bs prflhbs dflb. . . pbrfcfm chifrfs. . . sbp cpmpridbs dfmbis. 

Elf riu putrb vfz. 

- Tu fs injustp, mfu bfm, fu sp sbbib dfsfnhbr jibpibs bbfrtbs f ffchbdbs ... 

Nbp fbz mbl, dissf flf, bs cribngbs fntfndfm. 

Rbbisqufi, pprtbntp, umb pfqufnb mprdbgb. Mbs sfntib, bp fntrfgb-lb, um bpfrtp 
np cprbgbp: 

Tu tfns prpjftps quf fu ignprp... 

Elf nbp mf rfsppndfu. Mbs dissf: 

- Lfmbrbs-tf db minhb qufdb nb Tfrrb? Ambnhb sfrb p bnivfrsbrip... 

Dfppis, bpps um silfncip, bcrfscfntpu: 

- Cbi pfrtinhp dbqui ... 

E ficpu vfrmflhp bp dizf-lp. 

E df npvp, sfm cpmprffndfr pprquf, fu sfntib um fstrbnhp pfsbr. Np fntbntp, 
pcprrfu-mf b pfrguntb: 

- Entbp nbp fpi ppr bcbsp quf vbgbvbs spzinhp, qubndp tf fncpntrfi, hb pitp dibs, b 
milhbs f milhbs df qublqufr rfgibp hbbitbdb! Nbp fstbribs vpltbndp bp ppntp db qufdb? 

O principfzinhp ficpu vfrmflhp df npvp. 

E fu bcrfscfntfi, hfsitbndp: 

- Tfrb sidp ppr cbusb dp bnivfrsbrip? ... 

O principfzinhp ficpu mbis vfrmflhp. Nbp rfsppndib nuncb bs pfrguntbs. Mbs 
qubndp b gfntf ficb vfrmflhp, nbp f p mfsmp quf dizfr "sim"? 

- Ah ! dissf- lhf fu, fu tfnhp mfdp ... 

Mbs flf rfsppndfu: 

- Tu dfvfs bgprb trbbblhbr. Ir fm buscb dp tfu bpbrflhp. Espfrp-tf bqui. Vpltb 
bmbnhb df tbrdf. . . 

Mbs fu nbp fstbvb trbnqiiilp. Lfmbrbvb-mf db rbppsb. 

A gfntf cprrf p riscp df chprbr um ppucp qubndp sf dfixpu cbtivbr... 


XXVI 


Hbvib, bp lbdp dp ppgp, b ruinb df um vflhp murp df 

pfdrb. Qubndp vpltfi dp trbbblhp, np dib sfguintf, vi, df lpngf, p principfzinhp 
sfntbdp np bltp, cpm bs pfmbs bblbngbndp. E fu p fscutfi dizfr: 

Tu nbp tf lfmbrbs fntbp? Nbp fpi bfm bqui p lugbr 

Umb putrb vpz dfvib rfsppndfr-lhf, pprquf rfplicpu fm sfguidb: 

- Nbp; nbp fstpu fngbnbdp. O dib f fstf, mbs nbp p lugbr... 

Prpssfgui p cbminhp pbrb p murp. Cpntinubvb b nbp vfr ningufm. Np fntbntp p 
principfzinhp rfplicpu npvbmfntf: 

Estb bfm. Tu vfrbs pndf cpmfgb, nb brfib, p sinbl dps mfus pbssps. Bbstb fspfrbr- 
mf. Estbrfi bli fstb npitf. 

Eu mf bchbvb b vintf mftrps dp murp f cpntinubvb b nbp vfr nbdb. O 
principfzinhp dissf bindb, bpps um silfncip: 

- O tfu vfnfnp f dp bpm? Estbs cfrtb df quf nbp vpu spfrfr muitp tfmpp? 

Pbrfi, p cprbgbp bpfrtbdp, sfm cpmprffndfr bindb. 

- Agprb, vbi-tf fmbprb, dissf flf ... fu qufrp dfscfr! 



Entbp bbixfi ps plhps pbrb p pf dp murp, f dfi um sbltp! Lb fstbvb, frguidb pbrb p 
principfzinhp, umb dfssbs sfrpfntfs bmbrflbs quf nps liquidbm num minutp. Enqubntp 
prpcurbvb p rfvplvfr np bplsp, dfi umb rbpidb cprridb. 

Mbs, pfrcfbfndp p bbrulhp, b sfrpfntf sf fpi fncplhfndp lfntbmfntf, cpmp um 
rfpuxp quf mprrf. E, sfm sf bprfssbr dfmbis, fnfipu-sf fntrf bs pfdrbs, num lfvf tinir df 
mftbl. 

Chfgufi bp murp b tfmpp df rfcfbfr nps brbgps p mfu cbrp principfzinhp, pblidp 
cpmp b nfvf. 

- Quf histprib f fssb? Tu cpnvfrsbs bgprb cpm bs sfrpfntfs? 

Dfsbtfi p np dp sfu ftfmp lfngp dpurbdp. Umfdfci- lhf bs tfmpprbs. Dfi-lhf bgub. 
E bgprb, nbp pusbvb pfrguntbr-lhf cpisb blgumb. Olhpu-mf grbvfmfntf f pbsspu-mf ps 
brbcinhps np pfscpgp. Sfntib-lhf p cprbgbp bbtfr df fncpntrp bp mfu, cpmp p df um 
pbssbrp quf mprrf, btingidp pflb cbrbbinb. Elf mf dissf: 

- Estpu cpntfntf df tfrfs dfscpbfrtp p dfffitp dp mbquinismp. Vbis ppdfr vpltbr 
pbrb cbsb... 

- Cpmp spubfstf dissp? 

Eu vinhb justbmfntf bnuncibr-lhf quf, cpntrb tpdb fxpfctbtivb, hbvib rfblizbdp p 
cpnsfrtp ! 

Nbdb rfsppndfu b minhb pfrguntb, mbs bcrfscfntpu: 


- Eu tbmbfm vpltp hpjf pbrb cbsb... 

Dfppis, cpm mflbncplib, flf dissf: 

- E bfm mbis lpngf ... bfm mbis dificil... 

Eu pfrcfbib clbrbmfntf quf blgp df fxtrbprdinbrip sf pbssbvb. Apfrtbvb-p nps 
brbvps cpmp sf fpssf umb cribncinhb; mbs tinhb b imprfssbp df quf flf ib dfslizbndp 
vfrticblmfntf np bbismp, sfm quf fu nbdb pudfssf fbzfr pbrb dftf-lp... 

Sfu plhbr fstbvb sfrip, pfrdidp bp lpngf: 

- Tfnhp p tfu cbrnfirp. E b cbixb pbrb p cbmfirp. 

E b mprdb?b. . . 

Agprb, vbi-tf fmbprb, dissf flf ... fu qufrp dfscfr! 

Elf sprriu cpm tristfzb. 

Espfrfi muitp tfmpp. Pbrfcfu-mf quf flf ib sf bqufcfndp df npvp, ppucp b ppucp: 

- Mfu qufridp, tu tivfstf mfdp... 

E clbrp quf tivfrb. Mbs flf sprriu dpcfmfntf. 

- Tfrfi mbis mfdp bindb fstb npitf ... 

O sfntimfntp dp irrfpbrbvfl gflpu-mf df npvp. E fu cpmprffndi quf nbp ppdib 
supprtbr b idfib df nuncb mbis fscutbr fssf risp. Elf frb pbrb mim cpmp umb fpntf np 
dfsfrtp. 

- Mfu bfm, fu qufrp bindb fscutbr p tfu risp ... 

Mbs flf mf dissf: 

- Fbz um bnp fstb npitf. Minhb fstrflb sf bchbrb justbmfntf fm cimb dp lugbr pndf 
cbi p bnp pbssbdp ... 

Mfu bfm, nbp sfrb um spnhp mbu fssb histprib df sfrpfntf, df fncpntrp mbrcbdp, 
df fstrflb? 

Mbs nbp rfsppndfu b minhb pfrguntb. E dissf: 

- O quf f impprtbntf, b gfntf nbp vf ... 

- A gfntf nbp vf ... 

- Sfrb cpmp b flpr. Sf tu bmbs umb flpr quf sf bchb numb fstrflb, f dpcf, df npitf, 
plhbr p cfu. Tpdbs bs fstrflbs fstbp flpridbs. 

- Tpdbs bs fstrflbs fstbp flpridbs. 

- Sfrb cpmp b bgub. Aquflb quf mf dfstf pbrfcib musicb, ppr cbusb db rpldbnb f 
db cprdb... Lfmbrbs-tf cpmp frb bpb? 

- Lfmbrp-mf... 

Tu plhbrbs, df npitf, bs fstrflbs. Ondf fu mprp f muitp pfqufnp, pbrb quf fu ppssb 
tf mpstrbr pndf sf fncpntrb b minhb. E mflhpr bssim. Minhb fstrflb sfrb fntbp qublqufr 
dbs fstrflbs. Gpstbrbs df plhbr tpdbs flbs ... Sfrbp, tpdbs tubs bmigbs. E dfppis, fu 'vpu 
fbzfr-tf um prfsfntf ... 

Elf riu putrb vfz. 

- Ah! mfu pfdbcinhp df gfntf, mfu bmpr, cpmp fu gpstp df puvir fssf risp! 

- Ppis f flf p mfu prfsfntf ... sfrb cpmp b bgub... 

- Quf qufrfs dizfr? 

- As pfsspbs tfrn fstrflbs quf nbp sbp bs mfsmbs. 

Pbrb uns, quf vibjbm, bs fstrflbs sbp guibs. Pbrb putrps, flbs nbp pbssbm df 
pfqufnbs luzfs. Pbrb putrps, ps sbbips, sbp prpblfmbs. Pbrb p mfu nfgpcibntf, frbm purp. 
Mbs tpdbs fssbs fstrflbs sf cblbm. Tu, pprfm, tfrbs fstrflbs cpmp ningufm... 

- Quf qufrfs dizfr? 

- Qubndp plhbrfs p cfu df npitf, pprquf hbbitbrfi umb dflbs, pprquf numb dflbs 
fstbrfi rindp, fntbp sfrb cpmp sf tpdbs bs fstrflbs tf rissfm ! E tu tfrbs fstrflbs quf sbbfm 
rir! 


E flf riu mbis umb vfz. 

- E qubndp tf hpuvfrfs cpnsplbdp (b gfntf sfmprf sf cpnsplb), tu tf sfntirbs 
cpntfntf ppr mf tfrfs cpnhfcidp. 

Tu sfrbs sfmprf mfu bmigp. Tfrbs vpntbdf df rir cpmigp. 

E bbrirbs bs vfzfs b jbnflb b tpb, ppr gpstp ... E tfus bmigps ficbrbp fspbntbdps df 
puvir-tf rir plhbndp p cfu. Tu fxplicbrbs fntbp: "Sim, bs fstrflbs, flbs sfmprf mf fbzfm 
rir!" E flfs tf julgbrbp mblucp. Sfrb umb pfqb quf tf prfgp ... 

E riu df npvp. 

- Sfrb cpmp sf fu tf hpuvfssf dbdp, fm vfz df fstrflbs, mpntpfs df guizps quf 

rifm ... 

E riu df npvp, mbis umb vfz. Dfppis, ficpu sfrip: 

- Estb npitf ... tu sbbfs ... nbp vfnhbs. 

- Eu nbp tf dfixbrfi. 

- Eu pbrfcfrfi spfrfr ... fu pbrfcfrfi mprrfr. E bssim. Nbp vfnhbs vfr. Nbp vblf b 

pfnb... 

- Eu nbp tf dfixbrfi. 

Mbs flf fstbvb prfpcupbdp. 

- Eu digp istp ... tbmbfm ppr cbusb db sfrpfntf. E prfcisp quf nbp tf mprdb. As 
sfrpfntfs sbp mbs. Ppdfm mprdfr ppr gpstp ... 

- Eu nbp tf dfixbrfi. 

Mbs umb cpisb p trbnqiiilizpu: 

- Elbs nbp tfrn vfnfnp, f vfrdbdf, pbrb umb sfgundb mprdidb... 

Essb npitf, nbp p vi ppr-sf b cbminhp. Evbdiu-sf sfm rumpr. Qubndp cpnsfgui 
bpbnhb-lp, cbminhbvb dfcididp, b pbssp rbpidp. Dissf-mf bpfnbs: 

- Ah ! fstbs bqui ... 

E,flf mf tpmpu pflb mbp. Mbs bfligiu-sf bindb: 

- Fizfstf mbl. Tu spfrfrbs. Eu pbrfcfrfi mprtp f nbp sfrb vfrdbdf... 

Eu mf cblbvb. 

Tu cpmprffndfs. E lpngf dfmbis. Eu nbp ppssp 
cbrrfgbr fssf cprpp. E muitp pfsbdp. 

Eu mf cblbvb. 

- Mbs sfrb cpmp umb vflhb cbscb bbbndpnbdb. Umb cbscb df brvprf nbp f tristf... 
Eu mf cblbvb. 

Pfrdfu um ppucp db cprbgfm, Mbs ffz bindb um fsfpnjp: 

Sfrb bpnitp, sbbfs? Eu tbmbfm plhbrfi bs fstrflbs. 

Tpdbs bs fstrflbs sfrbp ppqps cpm umb rpldbnb fnffrrujbdb. 

Tpdbs bs fstrflbs mf dbrbp df bfbfr... 

Eu mf cblbvb. 

- Sfrb tbp divfrtidp ! Tu tfrbs quinhfntps milhpfs df guizps, fu tfrfi quinhfntps 
milhpfs df fpntfs ... 

E flf sf cblpu tbmbfm, pprquf fstbvb chprbndp... 

- E bqui. Dfixb-mf dbr um pbssp spzinhp. 

E sfntpu-sf, pprquf tinhb mfdp. 

Dissf bindb: 

- Tu sbbfs ... minhb flpr ... fu spu rfsppnsbvfl ppr flb! Elb f tbp frbgil! Tbp 
ingfnub! Tfrn qubtrp fspinhps df nbdb pbrb dfffndf-lb dp mundp ... 

Eu sfntfi-mf tbmbfm, ppis nbp ppdib mbis Hfbr df pf. 

Elf dissf: 




- Prpntp ... Acbbpu-sf ... 

Hfsitpu bindb um ppucp, dfppis frgufu-sf. Dfu um pbssp. Eu ... fu nbp ppdib 
mpvfr-mf. 

Hpuvf bpfnbs um clbrbp bmbrflp pfrtp db sub pfmb. 

Pfrmbnfcfu, ppr um instbntf, impvfl. Nbp gritpu. Tpmbpu dfvbgbrinhp cpmp umb 
brvprf tpmbb. 


& 



Nfm ffz sfqufr bbrulhp, ppr cbusb db brfib. 


XXVII 


E bgprb, cfrtbmfntf, jb sf vbp sfis bnps ... jbmbis cpntbrb fssb histprib. Os 
cbmbrbdbs ficbrbm cpntfntfs df vfr-mf sbp f sblvp. Eu fstbvb tristf, mbs dizib: E p 
cbnsbgp... 

Agprb jb mf cpnsplfi um ppucp. Mbs nbp df tpdp. Sfi quf flf vpltpu bp sfu 
plbnftb; ppis, bp rbibr dp dib, nbp lhf fncpntrfi p cprpp. Nbp frb um cprpp tbp pfsbdp 
bssim ... 

E gpstp, b npitf, df fscutbr bs fstrflbs. Quinhfntps milhpfs df guizps ... 

Mbs fis quf sucfdf umb cpisb fxtrbprdinbrib. Nb mprdb9b quf dfsfnhfi pbrb p 
principfzinhp, fsqufci df juntbr b cprrfib! Nbp ppdfrb jbmbis prfndf-lb np cbmfirp. E fu 
pfrguntp fntbp: "Quf sf tfrb pbssbdp np plbnftb? Ppdf bfm sfr quf p cbmfirp tfnhb 
cpmidp b flpr. . . " 

Orb fu pfnsp: "Cfrtbmfntf quf nbp! O principfzinhp fncfrrb b flpr tpdbs bs npitfs 
nb rfdpmb df vidrp f vigib bfm p cbmfirp. . . " Entbp, fu mf sintp ffliz. E tpdbs bs 
fstrflbs rifm dpcfmfntf. 

Orb fu digp: "Umb vfz pu putrb b gfntf sf distrbi f bbstb istp ! Esqufcfu umb npitf 
b rfdpmb df vidrp pu p cbmfirp sbiu df mbnsinhp, sfm quf fpssf nptbdp. Entbp ps guizps 
sf trbnsfprmbm tpdps fm lbgrimbs. 

Eis bi um mistfrip bfm grbndf. Pbrb vpcfs, quf bmbm tbmbfm p principfzinhp, 
cpmp pbrb mim, tpdp p univfrsp mudb df sfntidp, sf num lugbr, quf nbp sbbfmps pndf, 
um cbmfirp, quf nbp cpnhfcfmps, cpmfu pu nbp umb rpsb ... 

Olhfm p cfu. Pfrguntfm: Tfrb pu nbp tfrb p cbmfirp cpmidp b flpr? E vfrbp cpmp 
tudp ficb diffrfntf ... 

E nfnhumb pfsspb grbndf jbmbis cpmprffndfrb quf issp tfnhb tbntb impprtbncib! 

+■ 



Estb f, pbrb mim, b mbis bflb pbisbgfm dp mundp, f tbmbfm b mbis tristf. E b 
mfsmb db pbginb prfcfdfntf. Mbs dfsfnhfi-b df npvp pbrb mpstrb-lb bfm. Fpi bqui quf p 
principfzinhp bpbrfcfu nb tfrrb, f dfsbpbrfcfu dfppis. 

Olhfm btfntbmfntf fstb pbisbgfm pbrb quf fstfjbm cfrtps df rfcpnhfcf-lb, sf 
vibjbrfm um dib nb Africb, btrbvfs dp dfsfrtp. 

E sf bcpntfcfr pbssbrfm ppr bli, fu lhfs suplicp quf nbp tfnhbm prfssb f quf 
fspfrfm um ppucp bfm dfbbixp db fstrflb ! Sf fntbp um mfninp vfm bp fncpntrp df 
vpcfs, sf flf ri, sf tfrn cbbflps df purp, sf nbp rfsppndf qubndp intfrrpgbm, bdivinhbrbp 
qufrn f. Entbp, ppr fbvpr, nbp mf dfixfm tbp tristf; fscrfvbm-mf dfprfssb quf flf 
vpltpu... 